===== CHUNK 00 | 00:00:00-00:12:30 =====
[microphone rustling] Yeah, I was forty hours. Okay, perfect. Do you have, do you have a printer or anything? Or I can't share a screen. I have a-- Do you want some proj-- Uh. Can you use your HDMI? Uh- No? For iPad. But we'll- Uh. -we can put it on the... How do you want it? I can send it maybe- What's going on? Bro. He's going to present, and- I was saying I have, uh, the list of projects and- Yeah. I think I can get it connected. Let me send you. How's it going? Good. How have you been? Chi. Chi? Awesome. Mondo. Nice to meet you. Nice to meet you. I'm the HR. Yeah, I came with this. Night shift? For this, yeah. Okay. I, I don't travel light usually. Yeah. Not like before back in the day, right? Huh? Not like back in the day? No. [laughing] So I-- Anyway, I used to have the notebook. Now I've, I've upgraded. The iPad. But it depends on the day. Depends on the day. Yeah. And, and who you're, who you're working with. Some of the-- Some people feel more comfortable if you have the old school. So if you have an email, I can forward this to you, so you guys have it. [microphone rustling] [background chattering] Um, I'm not sure. We'll wait to see what's this guy's [microphone rustling] again. You guys, uh... He said you just got-- You guys just got in here a couple months ago? Yeah, I got in four months. Uh, they just did the, the grand opening, the ribbon cutting, and everything. It's for that. Okay. Um, they just did that, um, last week on Wednesday. And, uh, yeah, that's where we're at. Nice. And have you been with the company for- I just started on Monday last week. Oh, wow. Okay. Nice. We'll do that, and then we'll- I think that was it. Chi. Yeah. Nice to meet you. [background chattering] Awesome. But join right now we- Yeah. -don't have any wire. Okay. Just bring the second one. Yeah, true. That's how many people will be holding it. Okay. I would have to bring another device. I didn't bring it. I can get them in. So that was just last half wire. Yeah, no. Yeah. It doesn't have standard Wi-Fi. Wi-Fi is an option, but um... [sniffs] We will have to take a look, but I'm not... We ally expected to hold straight up. We'll take the top one. So maybe the bottom one is some, you know, the- Yeah. -wi-fi connection. Yeah, yeah. Yeah, I just come carry it in my car, and the heat does the heat, like, destroy it. Okay, cool. So, yeah, we can get the machine in there. [background chattering] We'll bring the one coming upstairs through the front door then. Um, yes. Yes. Yes. We, we have card. You, you need a card. I don't know. Let me get this real quick. One second. Okay. No, I'm done. I'll be right here. [microphone rustling] Just finishing. [door slamming] [deep breath] Okay. [deep breath] Okay. And some things. All right, cool. And should be good. Okay, cool. All right, perfect. Uh, it's a big list. We'll do-- We can zoom around, uh, while we're in here. Okay. [deep breath] So my, my thoughts when putting together a list, since I've done a lot, lot of projects over the years, I grabbed, uh, a different types of projects. So I've d-- I've grabbed some of my, um, some of the higher volume projects where, uh, some of the... It was just, um, installing a piece of equipment or, uh, moving, uh, one room to another room and then, you know, some of the bigger projects where it's a warehouse retrofit, uh, or, you know, or, um, installing all new incubators in a room, for example. Um, I can go down the list, but that was my kind of rationale, uh, on the project list. So this is the list you, you wrote the project you are, you are joining. It's, uh- Th-th-this is some of project list? Yeah, this is some of the-- these are some of the projects that I've been a part of, either directly led or I've been a part of the team [deep breath] over, over the time period. So- Can you- Yeah, yeah. Zoom in, and... Yeah, so this is the current, uh... This is the, the ones that finished more recently. So this is a bigger project. Uh, CNMI. So some of-- about some of the work that, that I've been doing more recently with Way Anchor. Mm-hmm. We have-- we manage a, a grant set from the Department of Justice that has projects-- that has grant money available for Native American tribes that come up with projects, uh, that, that come up with projects that qualify. So it's a lot of, uh, courthouses, uh, a lot of, uh, women's rooms, a lot of shelters, a lot of, uh, their community housing. And so they don't have a lot of construction expertise, so we come in as owner's rep and sometimes as a construction project manager and manage the full build-out. So that would include, uh, sitting with them to develop the project plan, uh, get it funded, and then obvious-- and then find, uh, find con-- find the general contractors who to bid on the RFP and take it through pre-construction, through execution, and then through closeout. So yeah. So that's, uh, the, the first one. Um, uh, I went through-- Here's some of the projects from, from Seattle Genetics. Uh, the biggest one is the, the regulated, uh, warehouse retrofit, uh, that included... This was a conversion of a basically a shell into a, uh, racking, shipping, and receiving for their increased, uh, product line that they were, they were, that they were, uh, moving up in. Um, and I was involved from the beginning. Uh, so I, uh, managed most of the pre-construction work, so that was coordinating with the contractors, uh, coordinating with the designers. And, uh, I was in charge of the building permits, so, uh, I had to have a relationship with the city, uh, and make sure that, uh, all the permits were started and then they would be ready for the time we did, uh, actual construction. And for that project, ultimately, I was the person responsible with-- for the, uh, walking through on the day-to-day with the general contractors, making sure that they were accomplishing work according to the schedule, um, and, uh, and that we're spending money, of course, according to our schedule, and ultimately, uh, going with the-- ultimately, uh, coordinating the commissioning of the project. So walking through that, uh, walking through there with the, the fire marshals, uh, and the teams that were gonna be taking over the facility. And we did have a couple issues at the very end that needed to be solved, which, which I can talk about. Um, but, uh, [laughs] where do you wanna take it? I, I can give like a... Uh, this is just a-- this is a kind of a general project list. I can, I can talk a little bit more about myself from the beginning, or we can go-- kinda go however you, uh, however you guys wanna leave it. Tell us about-- Tell us about yourself. Yeah. So I, I have a degree in... My background-- My, my degree is in chemical engineering. Uh, and so I started my career out as a kind of a process engineer and working-- a pro-process engineer, uh, and working out of environmental health and safety departments, uh, specifically at General Electric. Uh, so I worked there as a, uh, like a-- as a rotational engineer. So I worked at many different sites over my couple years at General Electric. Uh, I worked at some union sites, some non-union sites. They had some special sites where they had, uh, special ways of organizing. They, they called it teaming. So I've seen a lot of different, uh, a lot of different sites in my time and accomplished a lot of different, uh... I've seen a lot of different types of projects. Uh, so I started my career in, in that, uh, world. Uh, I moved into manufacturing. That was my next job at Evoqua Water Technologies. Uh, so I worked as a manufacturing engineer, uh, supervisor. So I, I had direct reports. So I managed the first shift, uh, product line, and then I had my process improvement, uh, you know, responsibilities as well. So I developed, uh... I improved the production schedule, reduced some of the work in progress, and then even, uh, as-- that was like a-- even got my design bag a little bit and designed, uh, some parts to increase the, the quality of, of some of the equipment that we were putting out since we were having issues with one of our suppliers. Uh, after that role... So that was also a rotational role. So I did that first, uh, it was about a year, and then I moved into-- That's when I moved into more of a pro, uh, project manager part of my career, where, uh, where w-- I worked. We did, uh, water technology, water equipment. So we would build out these water trailers depending on what the client wanted. So, uh, some of it was r-reverse osmosis trailers. Some of, uh, some of them... There was different requirements per the customer. And so I would work with the, uh, the, uh, chemical engineers, electrical engineers on the design of that equipment. And, uh, you know, we used SAP, we used Microsoft Project, and, um, I would manage the budget and then ultimately take, uh, the work that they had produced and work with the manufacturing team to get it manufactured. So that one was project management, but still more in the-- still in the manufacturing world. So I had to plan around other people's, uh, work. We had to, uh, still, of course, have a relationship. Um, there was a couple issues in-- at that time, uh, as well with, um, you know... My projects were more internal asset builds for different teams. So my projects were typically, if there was an issue with another project, they would reach for usually my work or my trailers, um, to, to backfill. And so, you know, I had to be really good and, uh, really efficient at communicating with my customers, with my internal customers to make sure that they had a good idea of when they could expect their, uh, their trailers, even though, you know, theirs is the last in line, if you, if you will, if you will say it like that. Um, those were a lot. And the range of, uh, the, the cost of those trailers were about one to about five

===== CHUNK 01 | 00:12:30-00:25:00 =====
Million dollars depending on, uh, what was going into that. [static] And then, uh, I moved on to, uh-- moved to Seattle, and that moves to the, the current, uh, phase of my career, which is more construction project management properly. Um, so I started at that site, uh, Seattle Genetics or Seagen. It's a, uh, pharmaceutical, uh, manufacturing, and they, they do, uh, lab work. And there I s-- I was the beginning of their-- the site miner works team is what they called it. So, uh, I worked for a contractor called Arcadis, and that was their direct client. And so I-- when I started there, there was no program at all. So I was one of-- I was one of the first two, uh, senior project managers there, and we were responsible for building out, uh, the program, coming up with the, uh, the, the SOPs, uh, the ex-expectations of our team, and coming up with the, the checklists, uh, the, you know, the permit to work, uh, requirements and, uh, developing the system, uh, developing the, the contacts for the work. So we, you know, at the beginning, we didn't have any contractors that we knew in the area, um, and so we had to, we had to develop that and figure out who, you know, who's good, who to trust, and, uh, and who to, who, who we can, uh, bring work to. Uh, that, uh, was a very high volume role. Uh, you can see I, I have some of the projects on here. Um- Before we move on to a different- Sure ... project that you had. Uh, how do you feel about that? I mean, you were one of the first two, uh, as a project manager to do part of it, and obviously starting from, I mean, maybe it's zero, but, uh, how do you feel about that? Is that something that you're okay with? Do you like that? Do you enjoy it? Do you hate it? What, what is your- It's fun. I like it bec-- There's, there's two sides to it. So I've been a part of teams where like General Electric, where you come in, and they have everything worked out for you already. They have all of the requirements. They'll tell you everything that you need to do. The-- There's a team that will make your schedule. There's a team that... There's an EHS team, uh, Environmental Health and Safety. There's an IT team. They have everything all ready, and all you have to do is do your job. Uh, and coming into this, uh, so there-- that has some benefits, but of course, the-- i-it's, um, that there's a lot of red tape. So it's a, it's a, a lot slower process to, to get work done and to get improvements done. And if there is an issue in the process, you don't have as much, you don't have as much of a say in how things are done. Versus, you know, coming into a brand-new program, uh, as a high volume, as a, a high performer myself- Mm-hmm ... I like to s-- I like to set the standard. So it was fun and easy. It was fun for me to come in. Uh, I don't-- No-- The, uh, the expectations that people have of the program are basically what they have of me, you know, at the end of the day. Uh, and I thrive in that type of environment. It's great because, uh, uh, as soon... Yeah, I, I think it's great. Um, so if that answers your question. Yeah. Yeah. Awesome. I mean, that's, uh, that could be something that you'll, you'll probably may run into, and that's why I ask because, you know, some people like where there already, there's already processes already set in place. Other people wanna put them in place and then kind of work from there. So it sounds like that's you, you enjoy either/or, but it sounds like you're okay with doing it. Yeah. And like I said, you have the freed-- you can... I've seen, uh, I've seen less optimal ways of doing things. I've seen ways that, uh, of doing things that work for some people and then work, you know. So I-- for me, I have, uh, I've-- over the years, I've developed a system of working that I think works very well, and if I'm allowed to put it into place, then I think that, uh, everybody, uh, that's a little ego talking. But- Mm-hmm ... I think everybody benefits if, if, uh, the extent to which we're-- I'm able to, you know, bring a, a level of high performance into, into the workplace and expectations. Uh, and of course, there is the, you know, as the team started to, started to build, uh, that was-- 'cause that was my first kind of senior role. Uh, you know, I, I did have direct reports, but direct, the direct reports at, uh, Evoqua, they were hourly workers. Uh, so that's a-- that was a different, uh, it's a different thing to have, uh, an associate project manager or a project manager under you where they are, you know, they have degrees. They ha-- they're on the same, they're in the same world as you. Uh, and they have opinions, and they have different ways of working. And you have to, you have to work around that, and you have to be a, a good manager while also maintaining the quality of, of the work coming out of the department. So there's, uh, there's give and take with, uh, with the style of, of management. Um, and that's something that I had to learn because for me, you know, up until that point in my career, it's just me managing the project, or I'm one person on the, on the team, and, uh, you know, it, it-- the, the buck s-- the, the buck stops with me. So it's, uh, until that point, it, it, uh, it was just me. Uh, and I didn't have to worry about anybody else performing well or bad. I just have to manage my, uh, my vendors or my contractors, and life will go well, you know. In that-- on that team, now you have project managers under you, and, you know, your reputation relies on them also performing, uh, at that, uh, at a, at a level or maintaining, uh, a, a-- maintaining the image of the department. So it's important to figure out what... You know, you have to have a, a healthy workplace, uh, work environment for, for people to work, and you can't tell people, uh... It, it depends on the culture, but in general, it depends on the... You can't tell people to work, uh, a hundred hours a week, you know, for example. You can, but, uh, you know, it depends. Yeah. Um, you can- So you mentioned that you had a, a chemical, uh, degree. Yes. So is that with working with chemicals, or is that working with like machinery that kind of works with the chemicals that are coming in and coming out?More with machines, I would say. I mean, both in general, but I would say my career is more, uh... It's-- I mean, I've had some projects where, you know, at, at GE, we had a-- I, I've had a couple-- I've had projects where I th- I think it's more with the equipment. It's more with the equipment. Um, but it's, it's both, I guess. At the end of the day, you know, a scientist requests a piece of equipment. You know, it's a five million dollar piece of equipment. You talk to the manufacturer. It requires argon, it requires helium, and, y-you know, it requires a certain amount of, uh, a certain amount of power. You know, I have to look at the, uh, the drawings, the, the P&IDs of the facility and determine what do we have on site and how are we gonna get it to that piece of equipment. Uh, and i-- how are we gonna get it to that piece of equipment i-in a safe way and in the form that it needs to be for that equipment to run optimally. And, uh, depending on the piece of equipment, that, just that process in itself can multiply the cost of, uh, of, of the construction. Some scientists, they b- they have a, you know, six million dollar piece of equipment, and, uh, and they want it installed, but then the installation is going to cost an extra five hundred thousand dollars because of all the additional, uh, work that's going to need to be done to the room or the preparation work that's gonna need to be done. So these are, you know, these are the some of the things that you have to work out at the beginning o-of the project. Um, sometimes, you know, as, as we developed the, the, the, uh, the department, scientists started to come to us earlier with their, uh, with their, uh, projects and with their desires. And the earlier, the better. T-the sooner I can hear about what you're trying to do, 'cause it's not just about the management. Management just, you know, wants to make more money. So they will say, "Absolutely. Will this help you make more? Uh, will this help you, uh, you know, invent more drugs? Cool." Ma-management might say yes, but not-- may not know the full scope of what might be necessary. So the sooner that my team or myself can be involved, the better the potential result and the less angry, you know, uh, some, uh-- an executive might be at the, at the price tag or the budget at the end of the quarter. Okay. So are you still working in the Way Anchor? Yes. Okay. So wh-wh-- I think you most of the-- you, you list down a lot of some of the job is in the Pfizer, right? Yeah. So Way Anchor, so we do a lot of, we, we do a lot of contract work with different companies. Like I said, Fi-- uh, when Pfizer bought Seagen, that was, uh, I moved, uh, I moved to Way Anchor, continuing in my role, uh, to an extent. So I still do some equipment, uh, I still do some equipment, uh, installations for them. Um, but a lot of my role has transitioned more into managing the DoD work. So I still, I still have some, uh, contacts. I still have to, uh, evaluate the, the chem-- the, the equipment, um, but it's much less volume. I would say at the, at the height when I was at s-- uh, Seagen, it was probab-- I, I was managing around fifty to seventy projects at a time. Um, now it's, now it's more around ten to fifteen for the equipment installations and then, uh, another, uh, ten for some of the bigger projects. So Way Anchor, so is the helping Pfizer to be install equipment? Yes. Okay. So what's your role for, for, for, for this project? So... Yes. So the, the role-- There's-- The, the main role is as a owner's rep project manager. That's what we generally call ourselves, which means we sit, I sit in between Pfizer and the contractors. So Pfizer wants to build a-- They wanna, uh, they wanna im-- upgrade the, the cafeteria, or they want a new clean room, or they want to install a piece of equipment. They-- Pfizer does not hire any, m-- any, uh, construction people directly, in general. So they hi-- they have maintenance people that, uh, manage the day-to-day work for the facility, manage, uh, they keep, keep the, keep the machines running, keep the air running, keep the electricity running from day to day. But for construction, they hire outside, which, which is us. So we manage their, not all of their construction, we manage their small-- It's, uh, probably u-under, under a million dollars, uh, is the stuff that would come to us. If it's above that, then it could-- then it usually goes to, uh, it depends on the pr-- It depends on the project. If it's, yeah, if it's above a certain amount, they have an RF. You know, they, they bid it out. They have a request for a bid, and then they, you know, they bid it out. And, um, sometimes we're involved in that bidding process. So sometimes we'll direct the bidding process as an owner's rep. So we'll help them figure out, uh... We'll help them put together a list of contractors to, uh, contact. We'll help them with the pre-construction. We'll help them put together the scope and then, you know, and then we'll, uh, and then we'll help them pick the end, uh, con-- the end contractor, which, uh, which could end up that person, that general contractor could end up leading the rest of the project. Uh, it just depends on the situation. So your company does the things just like AT&S. Say it again. Company AT&S. Uh, I don't know if I'm familiar. Okay. But there are-- I would say there are many companies that do- The owner's rep ... like, like this, like us. Many million, you know, hundreds of thousands. Many companies, uh, do, are owner's reps. It's usually because owners usually don't, owners usually don't know about construction. So owners will hire us to manage the construction, uh, because we have the expertise, uh

===== CHUNK 02 | 00:25:00-00:37:30 =====
With the comp-- you know, Way Anchor, we have the, we have the project managers and the engineers, uh, that have the expertise to know, uh, who's a good, uh, who is a good general contractor, uh, what is a good design or what is a, you know, what is a good design and, uh, what is a good plan, what is a good schedule. We know we have the expertise to, uh, to be able to adjudicate that, and so they trust us. So they don't have to get their hands dirty. All they have to do is say, "How much? Here's, here's some money, please get this w-- Here's some money, please get this work done," and then it's up to us to get the work done. And it's up to us to set the expectations so they know how much money it should cost and so it doesn't ever cost, it sometimes does, but so it doesn't ever cost more than the amount that you set at the beginning, optimally. Who is the main person to control the budget? Say it again. Who is the main person, the key person to control the project when the project... uh, the budget when the project is ongoing? Yeah. The-- for, for our projects, it's the project manager. So that would be me- So you will be- Or, yeah, whoever is the, the project manager on the project. We're in-- You're in charge of the schedule. You're in charge of the budget. You're in charge of, uh, making sure... You're in charge of safety. Um, you're in charge of the day-to-day. So you're in charge of, uh, everything to an ex-- you know, every... You're in charge of managing everything. So at the end of the day, if, if s- if we do go over budget, I get in trouble. If somebody gets hurt, I get in trouble. If somebody, um, if the project goes too long, I get in trouble. So it's-- you own, uh, it's you, yeah, you, you own a lot of, uh, a lot of the, uh-- You have a lot of responsibility, and that's why it's important to, I think, for, as a project manager, I think it's, you know, you have to be prepared, over-prepared. You have to be organized, prepared, and you have to communicate, over-communicate. You know, you have to communicate a lot, um, and understand who you have to communicate to, uh, communicate with more or less. Some people you can... And that's w-- over time, when you get a good relationship with some of the contractors, you can understand. Some of the guys, they are very trustworthy. If they say they will get you a price, an estimate at a certain day, they always get it done. If they say they're gonna arrive at seven AM, they're there at six forty-five. There are some people like this, and there are other people that say, "I will get it to you in two hours," and then you don't hear from them for two weeks. And you have to figure out who is who, and for the people that identify themselves as needing s- more communication, you adjust as such. And for people that need less, you, you know, treat them with, with the respect and say, you know, uh, you know, he's g- he's gonna get the work done, you know, so we're good. And I can focus on some of the more, uh, you know, could be problematic parts of, of the, the process or even some of the more technical parts of the project because that's even a piece a lot of the times, uh, even though some of the, some of the equipment I don't know, I've never heard of this equipment before in my life. You know, of course, there's a lot of equipment I've never heard of. Um, but it's the-- it's no excuse for anything happening. I still, I'm still responsible if some-- if, if the equipment breaks, if we, uh, you know, if we, uh, hook it up incorrectly, if something happens, uh, you know, I'm, you know, I'm at fault. Uh, or, you know, I'm at fault, and the company, uh, you know, it could be an issue. So, you know, once you have a, a good cadence and you have people you trust, then you can focus a little bit more on understanding the technical piece so that when you are in a room with, uh, the designer, the design build guys or the process engineers, you can be more informed, and you can ask i-intelligent questions that might catch, uh, some, some little risk mana-- some little thing that, uh, if you didn't s- if you didn't speak up, maybe, uh, there would be a bigger issue, you know. And it's-- You never know what it could be. So, um, but yeah, I li-- that's, uh, uh, ultimately, that's where I like to get to. Uh, I like to get to a, uh, to whatever extent it's necessary, and, and that would help. I like to get a decent technical understanding of what we're doing. Uh, and, uh, and then but at the end of the day, with everything, it's the fundamentals, uh, that make a, that make or break a project. You know, do you have good checklists? Do you have, um, do you have, uh, are you, uh, do you have good protocols? You know, do you have-- Are you o-operating according, uh... There's a, there's a bunch of thi-- Like a permit to work is, is one of the small things that, uh, over the years, uh, I've seen people with, uh, operate with and without it. And a permit to work is, uh, basically before a-any job gets, uh, before anybody starts any job, there is a checklist that has to be signed by specific people. So that would be safety has to sign it. Uh, IT, depending on the project, has to sign it. I would have to sign it, and then some, probably a money person have to sign it. And in order to sign it, all of those people are going to ask questions. And if the day comes on the construct-- the construction day comes and it's not signed, no work is going to happen. And I've been to-- I've worked at some companies that have, that sometimes let work happen anyway. Uh, so I've seen both sides. Um, but it's an, it's a big risk to let people work without this, uh, this, these, this type of document. There's a big amount of risk. If somebody gets hurt It could be mill-- you know, it could be any amount of, uh, money, uh, risk. Uh, if, if the job ends up costing more because, uh, the contractor, uh, I won't say... It might be less honest. Maybe they're dishonest. And the, the contract, it, it could cost a lot more because you didn't have it in writing up until, um, of going into it. So I remember, uh, there was a time at GE, which I, I'm thankful I got to work at GE so early on because they had so many rules. Uh, it was instilled in me from the day one. I remember, um, it was this, uh... Which project? It was, uh, this, uh, project. It was, uh... They had two huge... They were five hundred thousand gallon tanks that were filled with, uh, water and oil and a couple other chemicals. They had two huge tanks, and these tanks had never h-- been repaired. They had never been out of service for probab-- for fifty years or sixty years. And they had a permit renewal coming up. And so it was a big risk if they test the water coming out of these tanks, if, uh, if there's, if the, the particulates or if the, if it, if it buzzes for a, over a certain amount of whatever the chemicals that they're testing for, the permit will go up, and then you're gonna-- we're gonna have to pay more to the government, and we're gonna have to report more, and the company doesn't wanna do that. And so we had a situation. The other part about this project is that we were working at the headquarters. So this is the GE headquarters. This is where they test the jet engines before they get sent to Boeing. So this is the very last place where they do the final testing. So these people do not like to, uh, not have the testing going at all times. They don't like to, to have downtime. But in this situation, uh, and, and I was part of the safety department at the time, we had the power to say, "No, we have to do this or else." Uh, this is a number one priority. We have to do this or else. So we had to coordinate with the production team to get, uh, to find a time. And I remember the production team called me. It was a Friday, and they said, "We're actually going to be shut down, uh, next week, or we're gonna be shut down for the, the beginning of next week. You know, get your work done." And I did not have a, a purchase order for my, the contractor. Uh, but the contractor came to me, and he said, "Don't worry about it. I'll do the work, man. I'll come in and do the work." Uh, and I said, "Okay." And I was going home, and I got a call from the n-- you know, the H-- it was HR, and they said, "Are you bringing a contractor on-site without a purchase order?" And they're like, "If this person steps on-site without a purchase order, you will lose your job one hundred percent." And I was like, "Oh my god." You know, but this is the one time where, you know, we, we have a little window. Um, but, you know, I had contacts in the plant, and I was able to find somebody else in the plant that had a purchase order with the contractor, so we could, like, ride on their purchase order and split it after. Uh, but that was a, you know, a very hectic situation. And the, the tanks did end up needing to be repaired, so it was a-- You know, we did end up needing the full week, uh, but everything ended up working out because, you know, because we were prepared and, uh, you know, and also got lucky a little bit, to be honest, for somebody to be, uh, around with a, a purchase order already. So, uh, I would say I, I have many, many little stories like this over the, over the career. But I would say the, the biggest thing is, again, it's, it's having relationships, uh, being organized, and being prepared. That-- Those things will save you. You know, you, you won't even know the day. You know, it'll-- These things will save you day in and day out. You know, somebody, you know... Yeah, those, you know, those things will save you, so. So you mean Fryer project, you mean the equipment is bought by, by Fryer? Yes. So you help them to be mo-- set up the precision, then connect all the utility. Yes. Okay. Yes. So what's the most difficult part for, for this, this-- such kinds of engineering work? Yeah. I, uh, I think the mo-- the most difficult part is managing all of the different people and parts and doing it for multiple projects. What kinds of people here? For examp-- So for example, for a project, you have to, for-- you might have to-- you have to do a, a building permit. So you'll have to contact the city and, uh, figure out what you need for the building permit, and you have to be in contact with them to make sure that they, uh, that they keep your permit, uh, on the, on the front. You know, that they keep working on your permit. Because the city, the people that work for the government, sometimes they can be a bit slow, and sometimes if, uh, they can forget about you. So you have to maintain contact with people from the city. Uh, on- Who is, who is taking care of the design? Taking, uh, design? Yeah. There's-- There can be two people that are taking care of design. So sometimes we work with, we call it a design build contractor. So the contractor will design the building or the, the layout. They'll design it, and they will build it. Uh, and then sometimes it'll be a, for the bigger projects, it's typically for the projects that are, you know, over, let's say, over ten million. Usually, it's a separate designer, and then there's a general contractor that's doing the builder, the building. Uh, so in this case, uh, so an arch-- you would work with an architectural firm. Uh, and then specifically, if there's, if there's, uh, engineering equipment involved, then they have engineers as well. So during pre-- during, before construction, you have m- you have meetings

===== CHUNK 03 | 00:37:30-00:50:00 =====
Meetings with the entire, not the entire team, but the people who need to be there. So you meet with the, the en-- you know, uh, let's say one of the head engineer, you meet with, uh, the head architect. There will be myself, uh, there will be, uh, there will be one, uh, of the contractors, um, and there will be another-- There are probably one more, uh, uh, project manager like myself, uh, like a construction more... Yeah, more of a construction-heavy project manager that, uh, we, we talk to them about the requirements for the building and, you know. Usually, the people that are making decisions. So the people that are paying for it usually have desires for the building. So they'll come with the plan, and they'll say, "Here's the layout we were gonna put, uh, we were gonna put this m-machine here, this machine here, this machine here. This is how we were gonna lay out the offices." And the, uh, usually the, the people that work for Pfizer, for example, they would say, "Uh, I don't like this going here. I like it going here instead." And then we, as the project managers or construction project managers, we would also look at the drawings and say, "Well, this, uh, this doorway doesn't look like it will, uh, qualify, you know, against OSHA standards. Um, so you're gonna have to consider that. You have to get-- You have to have more room away from the door. Um, from a, from a s-s, uh, from a fire, uh, hazard standpoint, you're going to need to move the, you know, you're gonna need to move the fire extinguisher here, and you're gonna need another one in the room." So there's all of these, uh, there are all of these little considerations that you have for a design, uh, that, uh, that you discuss in the pre-construction meetings. So it's step by step. Who decide to connect the power from which panel? Who, who make the decision? Ultimately, it would be... It's, it-- That, that pre-construction team. So the people in that room at that time, uh, dec-- uh, decide. So we all have to agree on the plan. We all have to agree on the design. How much, uh, uh, how much electricity is this going to use? How, how many incubators are we going to have? How many freezers? Is it going to be positive air pressure, negative air pressure? Uh, what gases? Uh, what, uh, what chemicals are going to be needed in general? So it's-- Not even just right now, but potentially in the future, what might you want just as a dream? So we have to make sure that there's room for the expansion, um, you know, uh, the inevitable expansion when they have-- when they add more, uh, they add more lab space, uh, when they convert rooms into clean rooms, when they, uh, when they have secondary chambers. You have to basically... And that's not-- Uh, that's between the, that's between the team to discuss that design and come up with something that everybody agrees on. And then when people agree on it, that's when, of course, during that time, you're starting to work on, uh, the procurement. So, you know, once you-- One of the first things is once you get the requirements, so there's usually a basic level, uh, of, of there's a-- some requirements. I need... So they have, uh, yeah, there's-- I, I'm gonna have this much material going through the facility regardless. I'm going to have this many incubators. I'm buying this m-this many freezers, for example. We're gonna have argon. We're gonna have helium. We're gonna have, uh, you know, we're gonna have all these different gases. We're gonna have sulfuric acid. We're gonna need, uh, clarification. Uh, um, we're gonna need, uh, wastewater treatment, or maybe we'll just need a very small level of wastewater treatment. There are requirements that you have at the very beginning, and based on those requirements, you can set a procurement schedule, and you can start to buy some of those things that are going to take a long time. You can't really, you know... In-incubators, all incubators take, uh, you know, not all, but they can take a while to arrive, um, especially these days, it feels like most equipment, it's, uh, depending on the piece of equipment. And usually, those-- the expensive equipment that the scientists are buying, it's usually-- sometimes it can be, like, one year to get this piece of equipment even longer. You know, it's one year, but then there's some issues with the manufacturing, and it's-- they're building it. You know, it's a one million dollar, ten million dollar piece of equipment, one thing. So it's-- It can take a long time. So that one piece of equipment needs to be ordered immediately, and then you can-- but you can plan the rest of the build. You know how much power it's going to use. You know what, uh, it needs. Uh, and then you can discuss the rest. How many people are going to be working in the room? Uh, how s-strict are your, uh, protocols? You know, are you-- Do you have good protocols in place, or do you need, uh, additional... I'd say there, there's, like, three levels of safety in my opinion. There's the, it-- There's the human level, so I can keep myself safe, but then there's the equipment level, so you can keep people safe from the equipment by putting, uh, safeguards literally around the equipment or in the equipment or, you know, attached to the equipment. Uh, and then there's from a facility standpoint, there are ways that you can protect people, um, like negative air pressure, uh, like having a clean room, uh, like having people, uh, in a, you know, negative air room where they have to, you know, kind of spray down before they, they leave. Um, so there's kind of these different levels and depending on, uh, it, it, it all just de-- it all depends on the culture and the requirements of the project. Some people, uh, some people, you-- they have a lot higher, um... Some people, you know, it's, it's you need a lot higher level of protections because as individuals there's less controls. Um, for example, with, with scientists, a lot of the scientists that we worked with, they are very independent, uh, minded and, uh, I was finding that some of the Uh, there was some small, uh, OSHA st-things that they maybe didn't pay attention to. Like, uh, one of the biggest things was labeling the chemicals on the, on the counter. It's like never, ever, will you ever see any, um, labels on any chemicals if you walk into the lab, which is against, uh, many-- it's against the law, but, uh, but it's, it's something that can happen. So in such a circumstance, we're gonna have to have, uh, you know, hopefully more protections around to make sure that nobody gets hurt. Whereas in a manufacturing facility, you know, because the protocols can be very high and because the training can be very high, you know, maybe the-- a lot of the proto-- you know, a lot of the work can go into, uh- Excuse me. Yeah. Because we only have fifteen minutes. Sure. So if we don't, we don't finish all the questions. Sure, sure, sure. Sorry. Okay. So I just, let, just make it some short, uh, briefly. Sure. Okay. And one more question. So all your work is, is work in the cleanroom area, right? You said all of my work? All your work is in the cleanroom area? Not all. Not all. I would say we have-- I've had some cleanroom projects, uh, at, at Se-Seattle Genetics- Okay. -but not, not all. Okay. Maybe two over, yeah. How, how many staff are you, are leading the team? How many staff? How many staffs. [sighs] Directly on a, a project team, I would say it could be five. It could be five. Five? Yeah. It could be five, but it also depending on, uh, that's a bigger project. Say for a, for a five million dollar project, it could be five. For less than like five hundred thousand, it's just one person usually. Okay. Yeah. So, uh, what's your org chart? Any, any, uh, department for your org chart where you are leading? Yeah, in general- EHS. Say it again. For example, EHS. Uh, in this company, no. Uh, in this company, no. Okay. In this company, it's, it's mainly, it's just, uh, project managers. Uh, mainly project managers and, uh, maybe two project engineers. Um, but we work a lot with the safety people at-- that work with-- that work at the client. Okay. So typically, yeah. Five. Scheduler? Scheduler, I have worked with a scheduler before, but at this company- No. -it's a smaller company, we manage our own schedules. Okay. Yeah. And DC, document control? We do all of our documents. You do it. Yeah. Okay. There's one guy is taking care? Yeah. Okay. Okay. So and supervision, supervisor is, uh, is your staff or is it belong to others? Uh, you said the supervisors are, uh, me- Supervision of the work. Yeah. Is it, is it lead by you? Yes. Uh, I do-- Yeah, for the, for the work that I-- the work that I'm in charge of, yes, I am the, the supervisor of the work. For some of the projects that are larger, uh, I have, uh, a senior people that take the lead on some of the, some of the construction pieces that I'm not-- I don't have as much, uh, experience with. Um, but yeah. So in Seattle, you, you mentioned you just are handling one of the construction project, right? Say it again. In Seattle. Yes. So you're, you're managers-- management of some construction project? Yes. Could you tell me what kinds of project and, uh, what, what kinds of system are you, are you taking care for, for this project? Yeah. I would-- As, uh, broad categories, I would say, uh, equipment installations. I would sa-- uh, I would say equipment moves, uh, warehouse, uh, build-outs, and, uh, let's say internal reconstruction. So we've, we've done some cafeteria work, uh, in-office work. So any, so anything from equipment installations to, uh, to doing warehouses. Mm-hmm. Yeah. Okay. Clear. So here you mentioned in your previous job in the General Electric Co. Yes. So you are taking care of some of chemical treatment system. Could you, could you tell me more about it? Yeah. So that specific, uh, plant, they were-- they had a, a system where they were cutting metal using water, and as a result, you have water with very, very small pieces of metal in it, uh, that was hazardous waste. And they had a water treatment system that needed to, uh, that, that they had to-- that they were using to treat this, uh, to, to, to precipitate out this sludge, this hazardous sludge, and then pack it up and then ship it somewhere to be disposed of. Um, when I got on site, they were having issues with the water quality coming out of that system because they were ramping up their production, and their system was not rated for the amount of, uh, water and the amount of hazardous waste that they were pushing through the system. So we had to do, uh, so we had to do, uh, a study. Uh, so we had to optimize the chemicals that were going into the system. So we brought in, uh, now-- we brought in a couple different big contractors. I worked with them, and we sampled the water, and we tried different combinations of chemicals to see if we could improve the, uh, metal coming out of the water. And then, uh, after the testing, we, you know, we, uh, we also changed the way that we were, uh, that the chemicals were being put in. Uh, before it was manual, so there was a guy that had a watch, and he would, you know, when the watch said

===== CHUNK 04 | 00:50:00-01:00:07 =====
Five o'clock, he would put the chemicals in. But sometimes, sometimes- What was your role in this project? Uh, I was the lead project manager engineer on the project. Uh, I would, I wouldn't say... Yeah, I was the lead project manager on the project. So I was in charge of, uh, bringing together the, the contractors that did the testing, uh, and then ultimately, uh, coming up with the, the, uh, chemical introduction loop that we ended up putting in. So we, we ended up needing to, uh, buy a, a system of chemical introduction that was automatic instead of human-based. Mm-hmm. Okay. Uh, good. Yeah. That's good point of mind, Martin. So right now you're doing a project manager job, uh, sometimes with one or maybe five people in your team. Yeah. And, uh, you basically you do everything. You and your team members, you do everything. Yes. So there's no specific, uh, uh, job description. This guy focus on this, this guy doing that. It depends on the-- It-- Like I s- it always depends is my favorite word. Uh- It's okay. Yeah. I, I just want to have some idea. And, uh, how much time do you spend on the construction site? Because you, you sometimes you go, uh, supervising the construction. Yeah. Yeah. If there is active construction, it, uh, depends on the, the point in, uh, in the construction. So at the beginning of the project, I'm on-- I can be on site every, every day. Um, it-- Of course, it depends on the project. So you're playing the superintendent role. Uh, I wouldn't say superintendent, but there is a superintendent, but I'm, I'm making sure that the work is getting done on the schedule. So if... Because the superintendent, uh, can tell me what-- They can say, they can say anything sometimes. They can say, uh, sometimes the work is behind, but they want to-- they don't wanna sound bad, so they will say, "No. Yeah, we just got the, we got the foundation poured. Yes, we got the rack put up." Okay. And you go to the site, and there's no rack. So, so the superintendent comes from your contractor, not your company. Yes. Correct. Okay. Correct. Okay. And, uh, uh, when you're inviting people into your team, what is most important thing that you, when you make choice? I think the, the-- it's that they have a system that they, that they work under. I think in a role, in a-- as a project manager, it's so easy to get overwhelmed. You can get overwhelmed very, very, very quickly. Yeah. Uh, it's-- i-if you're not-- if you don't have a system that you, that you, that you use for your day-to-day work, even forget about the technology, Microsoft Project, the technology. Just you personally, you have to have a notebook or a computer or some way of working so you can, uh... Or email, whatever it is, you have to have a way of working so you can stay on top of your work and not get overwhelmed and not fall behind. Because that is the, uh, that's the main way that bad things happen, is really it's just somebody forgets. I'd say that's the one of the biggest things in project management. It's just that somebody forgot they were supposed to message the... They were supposed to buy the equipment, they forgot. They were supposed to, uh, issue the, the RFP. They were supposed to start the building permit, and they forgot. So this is the, the-- one of the most important things is that people, that you can show that you have a system, that you're organized, uh, and that you're comfortable with either a high volume of work or even, uh, even in the case of a, you know, the larger projects, it's still a, a lot of responsibility, and you have to communicate with a lot of people. And you, you have to, you know, with these million dollar, multimillion-dollar projects, there's a lot of things that need to be ordered. Lots of people need to-- You need to talk to lots of people. You need to get prices on lots of equipment. You can't come to somebody and say, "It's five-- It's, uh, you know, it's ten dollars," because if, you know... And, and you only talk to three people. Because if they go online and they find out that it's, you know, that we could have saved, you know, fifty percent because you didn't do your due diligence, then people are angry. So that's the biggest thing is people have a work system. So where, where did you stay now? I live in Scottsdale. Yeah. Yeah. So, and your job site is in- We have job sites. That's one of the reasons-- So that's one of the reasons why I, I was looking for work 'cause I wanted to, uh, come back to, in Phoenix and live here m- full time. You know, I fly, you know, few times a month, um, all over the, the country. Uh, and it would be nice. It would be, it would be nice to, you know, work at home and to be able to drive to work and then drive back home at the end of the day. So that's one of the reasons why I was looking for work. But yeah, I live in, uh, I live in s- in Scottsdale, um, downtown, and then we have projects in South Carolina. Uh, still in, in Seattle, uh, so North Carolina, all over. Mm-hmm. If we have projects in the south, for example, Chandler- Yeah ...or even the Casa Grande- Yeah ...it's okay for you to commute? Yeah. That's right, you know. You know, it's, it's right down the way. Okay. Yeah, absolutely. Right. I don't have any further question. Do you have any question for us? Uh, yeah, I guess, uh, as a question, what is your, um, what is your, the process that you're going through, uh, with the, for hiring? What's the, um, what's the timeline that you're looking to bring someone On general? Uh, we don't have too much time pressure because right now we have a smaller project with our client and we're okay with that. Yeah. And we're discussing the big project. It will be happening next year. Okay, cool. So, uh, I would say we want to, uh, have someone joining our company, uh, by end of this quarter. Okay. That works. Yeah. But, uh, it can be sooner or later. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Uh, and I was doing some research on, you know-- This is a-- such a cool industry that you guys are, are in. The semiconductors, it's the-- really the future. Um, so but I saw your-- So semiconductors, as, as I'm familiar, it's the, uh-- Almost everything is, uh, clean rooms. It's very high, very highly, uh, technical, very, um... Everything is, like, in a clean room. Is that my understanding? Or a lot of it? Not, not really. Okay. [laughs] Yeah. Because we're going to build a new facility. Okay. So before the clean room is built, we have our system- Ah. -already working. Okay, okay. Oh, yes, because so you-- Yeah, you guys are building the chemical systems, and then they come in with the w-- the extra stuff, the clean rooms- Yeah, yeah. -and what they need. Okay. We will do extension retrofit of the, the, the system in the clean room. Yes. But before that, if you were talking about the whole project, the new facility, most of the job is done in the house-- uh, is done in, in area without clean room. Okay. Do you like working in the clean room? Yeah, it's qui-- It's, it's calm. It's co-- Um, yeah, it's nice. It's cool to see the-- all of the, the s- the science. [laughing] [laughing] I'm looking-- I look around and it's-- it blows my mind that, you know, people are doing such interesting things, uh, even th- that are so, so small just with, with chemicals. It's, uh, very cool. So- You don't like it. You don't like it? [laughing] [laughing] Why not? You need to wear clothes, right? Always. Say it again. You need to wear some clean clothes. Yeah. And that's hot. [laughing] [laughing] We do both. It can be hot. So you can see the building with only concrete structure. Yes. And you can go into the cleanroom. Yes. Okay. That's awesome. Okay. Thank you. Yeah. Have a good day. All right. Well, thank you for your time, guys. It-- I know you guys are super busy. Just moved in- Yes. -to the building. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. Could we have the file? Yeah, yeah. Uh, if, if you have a-- If you can-- If you give me your emails, I can, uh, I can send this, uh... Okay. I will send email, email address. Or you can-- I can write down your emails and send it after if you- It's okay. I have, I have your email. Okay. It's, it's easy. Okay. You can send it. Okay. Perfect. All right, it works. All right. All right. Thank you. Cheers. Thank you for your time. Thank you. Thank you. Nice to meet you. Nice to meet you. Cheers. Hi. Hello. Have a good day. Oh, can you let me open the door please? Yeah. At least it's not as hot now. Oh. [laughing] It's still hot, but... Yeah. Um, uh, in the warehouse it's hot. Is it really? Yeah. Um, thank you for stopping by. Thank you. [wind blowing]
