  | 5 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
Theme Lesson and  
Page Number Grammar Vocabulary Academic Skills Proficiency Level
SCULPTURE
Food:  
Yummy, Yummy!
Page 73
• Yes/no questions • Food
• Colors
• Descriptive  
adjectives
• Focused listening
• Brainstorming
• Interpreting
Beginner to  
Low Intermediate
Sea Life Part A:  
Fishy Friends
Page 79
• Simple present: be • Colors
• Shapes
• Sea creatures
• Evaluating
• Interpreting
• Focused listening
Beginner to  
Intermediate
Sea Life Part B: 
Under the Sea
Page 88
• Comparatives
• Superlatives
• Sea creatures
• Descriptive  
adjectives
• Comparing
• Contrasting
• Evaluating
• Reviewing
Intermediate to 
Advanced
Imaginary Characters 
Part A: Meet the  
Wire People
Page 97
• Present progressive • Action words • Predicting
• Focused listening
• Surveying
Beginner to  
Low Intermediate
Imaginary Characters 
Part B: Robot Fun
Page 110
• Simple past
• Past progressive
• Electronics
• Action words
• Place and time
• Habits and rout ines
• Predicting
• Summarizing
• Evaluating
Intermediate to 
Advanced
Objects: Reduce, 
Reuse, Recycle
Page 117
• Adverbs of frequency • Environment • Surveying
• Interviewing
• Focused listening
Beginner to 
Intermediate

CREATEtoCommunicate
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom 
Published by:
Office of English Language Programs
Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs
United States Department of State
Washington, D.C. 20037
americanenglish.state.gov

First Edition: 2013
 ISBN (print) 978-1-624-25051-4
 ISBN (PDF) 978-1-624-25052-1
 ISBN (ePub) 978-1-624-25053-8
 ISBN (mobi) 978-1-624-25055-2
In this publication, there are many links to other websites. These links to 
websites do not constitute an endorsement by the U.S. Department of State  
of the site or the opinions presented therein.
Photographs: Images on pages 82, 88, 126, 128, 131, 138, 139 © 2011 Amy Tarmey
All other images © Shutterstock.com

  | 7 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
Rationale
There are unlimited advantages to using the visual arts for developing English language learning 
skills. The arts can be a source of inspiration, imagination, and motivation for learners. They can 
engage students in a variety of themes, subjects, and issues, as well as introduce learners to new 
ways of seeing the world. Most importantly, the arts can provide students with a voice in a world 
where they have limited English proficiency. 
This activity book is intended for English language teachers who would like to reap the benefits 
that the visual arts provide, but are unsure of where or how to begin. By providing art ideas and 
guidelines, matched with language objectives, this book seeks to use the arts as a tool to build 
and strengthen English reading, writing, listening, and speaking skills and develop the confidence 
students need to take risks and explore within a new language. Designed to supplement regular 
coursework, the purpose of this book is not to provide art lessons, but rather to provide ideas of how 
to incorporate the arts into the language classroom to make English accessible and understandable 
to students. 
Organization
The art and language activities in this book are designed for primary and secondary school students. 
Each activity lists a language objective and suggested skill level. There are four media explored in 
this book: drawing, collage, sculpture, and mixed media. The activities are designed to be used in -
dependently rather than sequentially, giving the teacher the flexibility to choose an activity that best 
fits the desired topic, language focus, and available art materials of the language classroom. 
In addition to flexibility, an important design feature of this book is adaptability. While art materials, 
language objectives, and skill levels are listed for each activity, most activities can be adapted and 
modified in numerous ways. Look for modification suggestions at the beginning and end of each les-
son labeled as Art Options or Extension Activities, or at the Additional Resources to supplement and 
enhance the lesson plans. These features enable the teacher to use, adapt, and modify an activity in 
various ways to best suit the needs of the students. 
The below grid is a model of what will be found at the beginning of each lesson:
Objective: This is the language-learning objective for the lesson plan.
Level: This indicates the student level for the lesson.
Materials: This lists the materials needed for the art project.
Teacher Preparation: This is what the teacher will need to do to prepare for the lesson.
Art Options: This will list variations in case the materials listed above do not work in the 
teacher’s specific setting.

8 | 
Selecting an Activity
There are three ways to select an activity to fit the needs of the students. 
• Language Focus: The language focus of each activity is placed at the beginning of each activ-
ity. Most activities in this book are organized around an authentic communication goal and 
discrete language structures. These objectives are designed to be adapted and modified to 
best suit the needs of the students. 
• Topic: In each chapter, the activities are organized under topic headings. 
• Art Medium or Materials:  Each chapter of this activity book is organized by art medium. 
This enables the teacher to easily search for an activity depending on what materials are 
available. However, most activities also offer suggestions for art material variations. The Art 
Options listed at the beginning of each lesson offers valuable suggestions on alternate mate-
rials. Likewise, adaptation and modification are encouraged. 
Teaching the Lesson
There are no exact rules or steps for making art. The tips outlined below offer broad guidelines and 
suggestions to take into consideration when creating art with students. 
1. Choose an appropriat e activity for the students. 
 Before beginning an art activity, read through the activity instructions, extensions, and varia-
tions to make sure the activity is suitable or adaptable for the age and language ability levels 
of the students. Most activities can be adapted and modified in numerous ways to fit the 
needs of students. 
2. Collect the necessary materials, or alternate materials, needed to complete the activity. 
 Read the materials lis t and the instructions for each lesson before beginning the activity with 
students. If the resources listed in the beginning of the activity are not available, read the Art 
Options section at the beginning of the activity for ideas on other ways to complete the activity. 
3. Help students plan the basic design of the artwork: the composition. 
 Most art activities require some planning. The amount and type of planning will depend on 
the age of the students, the specific activity, and the amount of time desired to spend on the 
activity. With both two-dimensional and three-dimensional artwork, students have a limited 
amount of space to work with. The teacher can help students plan how they will use the space 
provided by asking them to think about the organization or arrangement of the subject(s), the 
size of the subjects(s), and the desired colors and color combinations to be used. In many 
cases, the teacher can also show students how to organize the design of a piece of artwork 
by doing an example with the class, or by demonstrating with a student example. 
 

  | 9 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
Art Tips
Tips specific to each art medium can be found at the beginning of each chapter . Listed below are a 
few tips and suggestions that are common to all art media and activities included in this book. 
• If pos sible, have students bring in old shirts or other old clothes that can be worn over their 
clothes to protect them from paint, glue, or any other messy art materials being used.
• If s tudents are working with messy materials, try to cover and protect the surfaces students 
will be working on (desks, tables, and floor) with old newspapers or scrap (recycled) papers. 
By covering students’ workspace, the furniture in the classroom will not only be protected but 
clean-up will also be faster and easier . 
• Old baking supplies such as muffin tins or met al baking sheets make good paint mixing trays 
or palettes. 
• Recy cled materials such as magazines, papers, cardboard, plastic containers, and glass jars 
are utilized in many art activities throughout this book. If possible, collect these items for use 
in the classroom or ask students and other teachers to collect such recycled materials to 
donate for art activities. 
• Each chapter includes a materials list. The lists provided are broad suggestions of common 
materials used in art activities. They are intended to give the teacher an idea of possible 
materials that can be used with the art medium. Not all of the materials listed are needed 
to complete an activity. Feel free to adapt, modify, or add additional materials to any activity to 
best suit the resources available and the needs of the students.
• Ther e is a glossary provided at the end of the book with definitions and images for art pro -
cesses and materials that may be unfamiliar . 

70 | UNIT III: SCULPTURE
A sculpture is a three-dimensional work of art. 
Sculptures can be created from a variety of dif -
ferent materials. They can be big, small, abstract, 
or representational. Sculpture provides students 
with a great tactile alternative to drawing or paint-
ing. Kinesthetic learners particularly benefit from 
the process of working with their hands. Similar to all art media, sculpture can help students make 
associations and deepen connections between any topic and the target language, English. In addi -
tion, sculptures students create in the language classroom can be used as a platform for conversa-
tion, description, comparison, and meaningful language use. 
Tips for Sculpture
• Materials
Traditionally, sculptures have been made from materials such as clay, stone, and wood.
However, the activities in this book utilize recycled materials such as paper, cardboard, or
plastic. Look for and collect old magazines, recycled cardboard, and recycled plastic bottles
and containers to use for the sculpture activities. *NOTE: Make sure plastic containers used
in the activities are rinsed with water and clean. Do not use plastic containers that once
held dangerous or harmful substances.
• Using glue and tape
Glue and tape are common mat erials used to construct sculptures. For more information
about using glue with students, refer to the “Using Glue” tip in Unit II: Collage. In addition to
glue, many different types of tape can be used to construct sculptures: duct tape, masking
tape, electrical tape, or office tape. Stronger tapes, such as duct tape or electrical tape, can
be used for plastic or cardboard. Office tape or other thin tapes can be used for paper .
• Making sculpting dough
Sculpting dough is a fun and versatile mat erial that can be used to create numerous forms.
Similar to clay, most sculpting dough is elastic and can be stretched, rolled, pulled, and
molded into different shapes. Sculpting dough can be purchased in stores or made from
simple recipes at home or in the classroom. Recipes for making sculpting dough are in-
cluded in Appendix C.

  | 71 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
Sculpture Materials
This is a list of all the materials you and your students can use to create sculptures. Each lesson 
plan in this chapter will have a list of the specific materials you’ll need to complete that particular 
project with suggestions for variations in case you have different resources on hand. 
Required
 
• Adhesive: glue or tape 
• Paper  
• Pencil  
• Recycled cardboard 
Optional 
• Brushes for glue and paint
• Crayons 
• Glue: paste, white glue or glue sticks
• Magazines
  • Markers
  • Materials from nature: rocks, grass,   
 straw, twigs, sand, small rocks, 
 flowers, leaves, seeds, snow, ice
  
  
  • Paper: cardstock, cellophane, 
 colored paper, construction paper,
 poster board, recycled papers
  
  
  • Recycled plastic: plastic soda, juice
 or water bottles, used laundry
 detergent containers, any other
 recycled plastic containers
  
  
  
  • Scissors
  • String or yarn
  
• Tempera paint

72 | UNIT III: SCULPTURE
SCULPTURE ACTIVITIES
UNIT III
Title Language Focus Art Activity Page
Lesson 1: Food
Yummy, Yummy!
Guessing game using yes/no 
questions and adjectives
Food sculptures 73
Lesson 2: Sea Life Part A
Fishy Friends
Speaking and listening game 
using descriptive adjectives
Fish sculptures 79
Lesson 3: Sea Life Part B
Under the Sea
Compare-and-contrast 
poem using comparatives 
and superlatives
Fish mobiles 88
Lesson 4: Imaginary  
Characters Part A
Meet the Wire People
Present progressive stories Wire people sculptures 97
Lesson 5: Imaginary  
Characters Part B
Robot Fun
Storytelling using simple 
past and past progressive
Robot sculptures 110
Lesson 6: Objects
Reduce, Reuse, Recycle
Informational interviews  
using quantifiers
Recycled magazine bowls 117

  | 73 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
LESSON 1
FOOD
Yummy, Yummy!
Guessing game using yes/no questions and adjectives
Objectives: Students will ask questions and respond with answers in a food guessing game 
and will use descriptive adjectives in an information gap drawing activity. 
Level: Beginner to Low Intermediate 
Materials: Sculpting dough (various colors if possible), pencils, paper, and tape. Optional: 
markers, crayons, colored pencils, or images or samples of fruits and vegetables.
Teacher Preparation: 1. Photocopy the fruit and vegetable images on page 77. Cut each fruit 
or vegetable picture out and tape it to a note card. Another option is to find your own fruit and 
vegetable images to use, or draw fruits and vegetables on note cards. Each note card should 
have only one fruit or vegetable on it. Make sure there are enough cards for every student in 
your class. 2. If possible, make sculpting dough for students to use in this activity. Sculpting 
dough recipes are included in Appendix C. (If materials for sculpting dough are not available, 
students can complete this activity as a drawing activity.) 3. If possible, duplicate the mind 
map template in the Reproducible Worksheet section. 4. Prepare the signs for the human 
graph activity in Part Four . 
Art Options: If sculpting dough is not available, this activity can be completed as a drawing 
or painting activity. Students can draw a fruit or vegetable with pencils, crayons, markers, 
or colored pencils. If tempera or watercolor paints are available, students can make a fruit 
or vegetable painting. 
INSTRUCTIONS
Part One: Fruit and Vegetable Warm-Up Activity 
1. Make fruit or vegetable cards before playing this game. See the instructions in the Teacher 
Preparation section. 
2. Depending on the level of your students, review the names of the fruits and vegetables, ad -
jectives that might describe the fruits or vegetables, and the words for colors, shapes, or 
sizes of the fruits and vegetables. 
3. Mix the car ds up and tape one fruit or vegetable card on the back of each student. 
4. Tell students that when you say “Go!” they must walk around the classroom and find a part-
ner . The pair should then ask yes/no questions to try to figure out which fruit or vegetable is 
taped on their backs. Possible yes/no questions may include the following:

74 | UNIT III: SCULPTURE
Is it a vegetable? 
Is it sweet? 
Is it salty? 
Is it red? 
Is it a small fruit (or vegetable)? 
Is it large?
Is it bitter?
Do you eat the vegetable (or fruit) with a fork?
Do you eat it with a spoon?
Does it grow in the ground?
Does it grow on a tree?
5. When one student answers “no” t o a question, it is the other student’s turn to ask questions 
about the fruit or vegetable card on his or her back. If both students get a “no” answer, the 
students must continue walking around the classroom to find different partners. 
6. Students should continue asking questions until they c an figure out which fruit or vegetable 
is taped to their backs. 
Part Two: Fruit and Vegetable Mind Maps and Sculptures
1. Break students up into small groups. 
2. Use the fruits and vegetables not e cards from the previous activity and assign a fruit or vegetable 
to each group. (If possible, bring in actual samples of different types of fruits and vegetables.) 
3. Tell each group they must brainstorm adjectives to describe their fruit or vegetable. Students 
can focus on describing its size, shape, color, and taste. 
4. Groups should create a mind map to record their brainstormed answers. Groups can use the 
mind map template included at the end of this section, or they can create their own. 
5. After the groups have finished filling out their mind maps, have them switch mind maps and 
fruit or vegetable cards with another group.
6. The new group should add any additional descriptive adjectives they can think of to the mind map. 
7. If desired, repeat the activity and have groups fill out another mind map for a different fruit or 
vegetable. 
Example Mind Map
Fruit or 
Vegetable
Strawberry
Small
Red
Round
Green
Oval
Red with black seeds
Pink
Small and round
Juicy
Sweet
Taste Color
Size Shape
Description

  | 75 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
8. Tell students they will be creating a small sculpture of one of the fruits or vegetables they 
have described. 
9. Demonstr ate to students how to create a food sculpture. For example, to create a strawberry, 
use red sculpting dough and form the dough into a small round shape. Next, you could take a 
small amount of green sculpting dough and roll it into a skinny rectangle to use for the stem. 
You could then flatten a piece of green dough to make a little leaf and attach it to the base of 
the stem. Lastly, you could use a pencil to poke holes into the strawberry to represent the 
seeds, or stick small pieces of sculpting dough to the strawberry for the seeds.
10. Pass out sculpting dough to students and have them begin working. 
11. Tell students to refer to their mind maps or fruit and vegetable cards if needed. 
Part Three: Information Gap Drawing Activity 
1. To further reinforce descriptive adjectives, do an information gap drawing activity with students:
a. When students are finished with their sculptures, ask them to place their sculptures 
on one central desk or table. 
b. Tell students to find a partner . One person in the pair should be the describer, while 
the other person is the drawer . 
c. The describer should pick one fruit or veget able sculpture from the central desk and 
bring it to his or her desk, without showing it to his or her partner . 
d. The describer should then begin describing the fruit or veget able sculpture to his or 
her partner . The partner should draw what he or she hears. Remind the describer to 
explain the primary shapes of the item first and the small details of the item last. 
e. If crayons, colored pencils, or markers are available, the describers can also use color 
in their descriptions. 
f. When they ar e finished, students can compare their drawings to the sculptures. 
g. Have partners switch roles and choose a new fruit or vegetable sculpture to describe. 
Part Four: Human Graph Closing Activity 
1. To poll which fruits and vegetables students prefer the most, have students make a human 
graph as a closing activity. 
2. Before starting the activity make five signs. The signs should say Love it, Like it, It’s okay, Don’t 
like it, and Hate it. 
3. Review what each sign means with students. Use gestures and facial expressions to demon-
strate the meanings. 
4. Tape the signs in five different locations around the classroom. 
5. Tell students that when you hold up a fruit or vegetable sculpture they must walk to the sign 
that expresses how they feel about that fruit or vegetable: Love it, Like it, It’s okay, Don’t like it, 
and Hate it.
6. When each student has chosen a sign, ask students under the different categories why they 
love, like, or hate that particular fruit or vegetable. Students should naturally use some of the 
previously brainstormed descriptive adjectives. For example, “I love strawberries because 
they are sweet and juicy.”
7. Keep repeating the activity by holding up a new fruit or vegetable sculpture. Students must 
move again to the sign that best describes how they feel about that item. Again, keep asking 
different students about their feelings. 

76 | UNIT III: SCULPTURE
8. For each fruit or vegetable sculpture that is held up, count how many students are standing 
under each category. Students can then make graphs that show which fruits or vegetables 
the class likes the best and least. 
Extension Activity:
Alphabet Food Poem
Have students write an alphabet poem about fruits, vegetables, or other foods. An alphabet poem 
follows the order of the alphabet, listing a word or phrase that begins with the corresponding letter . 
Alphabet poems can be simple and can be used with beginning learners to reinforce vocabulary and 
the alphabet, or they can be made more difficult for intermediate learners by instructing students 
to list adjectives that describe food. See the examples below. Students can work in pairs, groups, or 
together as a class to complete the poem. 
Using Foods
Apple
Banana
Carrot
Dates
Eggplant
Fish
Garlic
Hamburger
etc.
Using Food Adjectives
Aromatic, acidic, appetizing
Buttery
Crunchy, crispy, creamy
Delicious, dry
Edible
Fragrant, flavorful, fruity
Good
Hot
etc.
Internet Resources: 
Fruit and Vegetable Word Search
Create a word search with the fruit and vegetable vocabulary used in this activity. Word searches are 
a fun way to reinforce vocabulary words and their spellings. You can easily create word searches on 
the website below. 
Discovery Education Puzzle Maker: www.discoveryeducation.com/puzzlemaker/
Learn About Healthy Eating!
Visit the U.S. Government’s Food Plate website for information, activities, multimedia and more on 
healthy eating. 
http://www.choosemyplate.gov 

  | 77 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
EAT YOUR FRUITS AND VEGETABLES!


78 | UNIT III: SCULPTURE
MIND MAP
Directions: Describe your fruit or vegetable using the mind map below.
Taste Color
Size Shape
Description
Fruit or 
Vegetable
________

  | 79 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
LESSON 2
SEA LIFE PART A
Fishy Friends
Listening and drawing game using descriptive adjectives
Objectiv
e: Students will create fish sculptures and use these to participate in a description 
game using descriptive adjectives. 
Lev
el: Beginner to Intermediate 
Materials: Large recycled plastic bottles, string, stapler, scissors, markers. Optional: tem-
pera paint, paint brushes.
Teacher Preparation: 1. If possible, duplicate the fish cards included in the Reproducible 
Worksheets section of this activity, or find other fish images to use. 2. Ask students, other 
teachers, or parents to bring in recycled plastic bottles. Cut the bottoms off the plastic bottles 
with scissors or a razor . 3. Cut pieces of string, two or three feet long, one for each student. 
Art Options: If recycled plastic bottles are not available, this activity can be completed as a 
drawing or painting activity. Students can draw their fish with pencils, crayons, markers, or 
colored pencils, or if tempera or watercolor paints are available, students can paint their 
fish. 
INSTRUCTIONS
Part One: “I Spy Something…” Warm-Up Activity 
1. Before groups begin playing the “I Spy” game, introduce vocabulary words associated with 
fish body parts: fins, gills, eyes, mouth, and scales. 
2. Show students the pictures of fish parts on page 84 and the fish cards on pages 85–87. 
3. Have students play the “I Spy” game in groups: 
a. Tape the fish cards in the Reproducible Worksheets section on the board or someplace 
where all students can see them.
b. Demonstrate the game to students. Pick one c ard, and start to describe it, saying “I 
spy something…”
 For example, if you pick the card below you might say:
I spy something yellow.
I spy something yellow and white.
 I spy something yellow and white with a long, skinny white mouth.


80 | UNIT III: SCULPTURE
c. Students should guess which picture is being described. 
d. When students play the game in their groups, the student who guesses correctly then 
becomes the describer .
Part Two: Recycled Fish Sculpture
1. After playing the “I Spy” game, tell students they will be 
creating their own fish. Students can create any type of 
fish they would like, real or imaginary, as long as the fish 
has eyes, a mouth, and fins. 
2. Have students make a quick drawing of their fish and 
discuss their fish with a partner or with the teacher . For 
example, a student might say, “I want to make a blue fish 
with big eyes and small fins.”
3. Begin the fish sculpture by passing out a plastic bottl e to 
each student. (The plastic bottle should already be pre-
pared for the activity; see the Teacher Preparation instructions at the beginning of the activity.)
4. Have students poke a hole in the top of the plastic bottle close to the center with scissors. For 
young learners, do this step for students ahead of time.
5. Pass out a piece of string to each student. Have students pull the string through the hole on 
the top of the plastic bottle. Tie a small bead, twig, or small piece of cardboard onto the end 
of the string inside the bottle. This will secure the string to the bottle and allow students to 
hang their fish sculptures when they are completed.
6. Students should next stapl e together the ends of the plastic bottle to create the tail fins. 
Younger learners might need help in stapling the two sides of the plastic together . The top or 
opening of the plastic bottle will be the mouth of the fish.
7. Once students have created the tail fins, they can begin coloring their fish and adding designs 
with markers, or, if you have tempera paint available, by painting the plastic bottle. 
8. Tell students to look at the fish cards for ideas and inspiration. 
9. Once students have colored or painted the plastic bottles, they can begin to draw details on 
the bottle: fins, gills, eyes, and other designs. If students used markers, have students draw 
the fish details with a black marker so the details stand out against the colors. If they used 
paint, make sure the paint is completely dry before they begin adding details. 
10. When the sculptures are finished and dry, hang them around the clas sroom or school.
Activity Example
Part Three: Information Gap Activity
*NOTE: The information gap activity can be conducted with either the fish cards provided in this 
activity or the sculptures that students created. If you would like to use students’ sculptures for the 
activity, substitute them for the fish cards in the instruction below. 
1. To begin, hold up different fish cards for the class to see, and ask students for adjectives to 
describe the fish. Specifically ask about the shape of the body, size of the body, color(s) of the 
fish, and details about the fins, eyes, or mouth. 

  | 81 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
2. Make a list of the adjectives on the board for students to refer to. See the example chart below.
Shape of the Body Size of the Body Color(s) of the Fish Details about the Fins, 
Eyes, and Mouth
rectangular
oval
round
triangular
long
narrow
small
large
tiny
huge
black
white
blue
red
yellow
orange
green
large, black eyes
short, yellow tail fin
skinny, black fins
long, pointy mouth
3. To increase students’ understanding of the adjectives, draw pictures next to the words or over 
the fish pictures to help students remember their meaning. For example, if you have a list of 
adjectives under the category “Shape of the Body” you might have the word rectangular, and 
then a picture like this:
 
 Add the word oval, and then a picture like this: 
4. Depending on the lev el of students, leave the chart or list on the board for students to refer 
to while playing the information gap game. 
5. Demonstrat e the game to the class before students begin playing.
a. Put the fish cards in a pil e, with the images facing down, so that the pictures cannot 
be seen. (If using the fish sculptures, place or hang them in a location where every 
student can see them.)
b. Pass out a piece of paper and pencils to students. Optional: Use crayons and markers 
as well if they are available. 
c. The student who will be describing the fish should pick one card.
d. He or she should begin by describing the basic shape of the fish and details about the 
fish on the card that he or she picked. 

82 | UNIT III: SCULPTURE
e. The other students should be lis tening to the description and drawing what they hear . 
Make sure the student who is describing the fish goes slowly, so that the other stu -
dents have time to listen, think, and draw. For example, if the student picks the card 
below, he or she might say:
The fish has a long, rectangular body.
The body is yellow. 
The fish has a short, yellow tail fin. 
The fish has a long, pointy mouth that is black.
The fish has a small black eye.
The fish has a white stripe underneath its eye.
6. After this, have students compare their drawings to the fish card. 
7. This activity can be c ompleted in pairs or small groups. Stress to students that their drawings 
do not need to be perfect or complete. 
8. Make sure that students switch roles and get a chance at being both the describer and drawer .
Part Four: Exit Ticket Closing Activity 
1. Have students line up before leaving class. 
2. Give students a category used in describing the fish cards and sculptures. The category could 
be shape of the body, size of the body, colors, or details about the fins, eyes, or mouth. 
3. Tell students they have to say an adjective from the specified category before leaving class. 
Students cannot repeat answers.
Extension Activity:
Go Fish! 
To play the game Go Fish, you will need to make a deck of fish cards from the Reproducible Work-
sheets at the end of the section. Duplicate each sheet twice so that there is two of every card. Have 
students cut out the cards. Three to four students can play with one 
deck of cards. (If you need more than one deck of cards, duplicate 
the fish card worksheets as many times as necessary.) Pass out two 
cards to each student playing. Students should not show their cards 
to anybody else. The remaining cards go in a pile in the middle of 
the students, face down, so that students cannot see the pictures. 
One student begins by asking another student if he or she has the 
match to one of their cards. The student asking has to explain what 
the card looks like. For example, if the first student was looking for the match to the fish card above, 
he or she might say “Do you have a fish that has an oval body with a yellow mouth and white spots?”
If the answer is yes, the second student has to give his or her card. If the answer is no, the second 
student says, “Go fish!” This means that the first student gets to pick one card from the pile to find 
the match. When students can make a match, they should display the two cards in front of them. 
Students take turns asking questions and trying to find the matches for their cards until the cards 
in the middle run out. The student with the most matches wins. 


 | 83 
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
Additional Resources:
The Monterey Bay Aquarium has many ocean and sea life resources on their website: animal fact 
cards, matching games, “I Spy” games, coloring pages, memory games, online books, crossword 
puzzles, tic-tac-toe, bingo, songs with lyrics, and information about science careers, animals, sea 
life, and the ocean.
http://www.montereybayaquarium.org/lc/kids_place/
On the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s (NOAA) website you can find many ocean 
and sea life resources for students and teachers. They have facts and information about the ocean, 
fish, and reefs, as well as coloring pages, games, puzzles, word searches, and stories. 
http://www.education.noaa.gov/socean.html
The Smithsonian’s Ocean Portal is an amazing site for teachers and students. Visit this site for fur-
ther lesson plans, photo journeys, multimedia, and more! 
http://ocean.si.edu/

84 | UNIT III: SCULPTURE
GET TO KNOW YOUR FISHY FRIENDS!
FINS
SCALES
MOUTH
EYES


  | 85 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
SOMETHING SMELLS FISHY! FISH CARDS


86 | UNIT III: SCULPTURE
SOMETHING SMELLS FISHY! FISH CARDS


  | 87 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
SOMETHING SMELLS FISHY! FISH CARDS


88 | UNIT III: SCULPTURE
LESSON 3
SEA LIFE PART B
Under the Sea
Ocean mobiles and a compare-and-contrast poem  
using comparatives and superlatives
Objective: Students will create a sea life mobile, participate in an art critique, and write a 
compare-and-contrast poem using comparatives and superlatives. 
Level: Intermediate to Advanced 
Materials: Paper plates, paper, pencils, wire coat hangers, flexible wire, string, glue, tape, 
and fish images from previous activity (Lesson Two). Optional: crayons, markers, or colored 
pencils.
Teacher Preparation: 1. Duplicate the underwater scene included at the end of this section. 
Make enough copies so that each group can have one. 2. Choose a type of mobile depending 
on what materials you have available and what is most appropriate for your students. Prepare 
those materials before the activity. 3. Duplicate the sea life survey located at the end of this 
activity. 
Art Options: If mobile materials are not available, this activity can also be completed as a 
drawing or painting activity. Students can draw a sea life scene, with sea plants and ani-
mals using pencils, crayons, markers, or colored pencils. If tempera or watercolor paints 
are available, students can paint a sea life scene. The drawing or paintings can be used as 
motivation for the art critique and contrast poem. 
INSTRUCTIONS
*NOTE: A mobile is a sculpture made by assembling objects together and balancing or arranging 
them in a manner in which they can move freely. 
Part One: “I Spy” Group Contest Warm-Up Activity 
1. Give each group a copy of the underwater cartoon scene from the Reproducible Worksheets 
section. 
2. When the teacher says “go,” t ell each group to list as many sea animals as they can from the 
underwater picture. Students can use bilingual dictionaries if they like. 
3. Give groups a specific amount of time (no more than three minutes) and then call “stop.”

  | 89 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
4. Have groups compare answers to see which group named the most underwater items. Pos-
sible answers are listed below:
fish shark whale octopus crab
squid clam starfish turtle eel
Part Two: Sea Life Mobiles
1. Use the underwater scene and answers that students brainstormed in Part One to think of 
more animals, fish, and vegetation found in the ocean. Have students create a mind map on 
the board with their answers. Groups can take turns coming to the board to add an item to 
the mind map. Possible items might include whales, sharks, dolphins, turtles, squid, octo -
pus, jellyfish, starfish, sea horses, eels, fish, sea shells, seals, penguins, sea lions, and coral 
reefs. 
2. Use the images pro vided at the end of this lesson to demonstrate the meaning of the vocabu-
lary words generated in the mind map.
3. Tell students they will be making their own sea life mobile. 
4. As specified in the Teacher Preparation section, choose a type of mobile depending on what 
materials you have available and what is most appropriate for your students. The mobiles 
students create should demonstrate various aspects of life in the ocean. Below several mo-
bile types are described.
Mobile Types
Paper Plate Mobiles 
Draw a spiral on a paper plate, starting at the 
outside and spiraling into the center of the plate, 
and cut along the spiral. Next, tell students to draw 
pictures of the sea life they would like to include in 
their mobile. Use whatever drawing materials  
you have at your disposal: pencils, crayons, or 
markers. Attach string to student’s drawings, and 
hang them from various points of the paper plate 
spiral. If magazines with images of sea life are 
available, students could cut images out to include 
in the mobile instead of drawing them. 


90 | UNIT III: SCULPTURE
Coat Hanger Mobiles
In this method of creating a mobile, have students 
draw or find images of various types of sea life  
similar to the paper plate mobiles. However,  
instead of hanging the images from a paper plate, 
hang them from a coat hanger . Attach the drawings 
or images to the coat hanger with string of varied 
lengths so the drawings hang at different heights. 
Wire Mobiles
For wire mobiles, flexible wire is needed (such as a 
wire coat hanger). Students first create a base for 
the mobile. The base can be any shape or form as 
long as other parts of the mobile can be added to it. 
Students should then bend wire into different sea 
animal, fish, and plant shapes. Next, attach the sea 
life to the base of the mobile with wire or string. 
See the image at the beginning of the activity for an 
example. 
5. T ell students how to make their mobiles, using the directions listed above and showing the 
example mobile. 
6. When s tudents have finished their mobiles, hang the mobiles around the classroom. 
Part Three: Art Critique with Comparative and Superlative Adjectives
1. Giv e students time to walk around the classroom and look at their classmates’ artwork.
2. Hav e students fill out a survey worksheet while they are looking at the mobiles. A survey 
worksheet is included at the end of this section. Modify the survey as needed to fit the needs 
of your class. 
3. T ell students that artists often have art critiques, where they talk about their artwork with 
other people. In art critiques, artists can talk with each other about things they like about the 
artwork and areas where they think need improvement. Artists then compare and contrast 
the various works of art with each other to gain perspective and feedback. 
4. Demons trate to students how to compare sea life mobiles. Use comparative and superlative 
adjectives. See the chart on the next page for suggestions.
5. Ask f or student volunteers to compare and contrast two sea life mobiles. See if students use 
or know how to use -er and -est or more or most for the comparative and superlative adjective 
forms. If students are having trouble using the correct form, provide explicit instructions on 
comparatives and superlatives. 

  | 91 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
One-Syllable Adjectives
COMPARATIVE: Construct the comparative form of a one-syllable adjective by adding -er
SUPERLATIVE: Construct the superlative form of a one-syllable adjective by adding -est
Adjective Comparative Form Superlative Form Examples
tall taller tallest Juan’s mobile is tall. Sara’s 
mobile is taller than Juan’s. 
Jenny’s mobile is the tallest.
big bigger biggest Juan’s mobile is big. Sara’s 
mobile is bigger than Juan’s. 
Jenny’s mobile is the biggest.
Two-or-More Syllable Adjectives
COMPARATIVE: Construct the comparative form of a two-or-more syllable adjective by 
adding more before the adjective
SUPERLATIVE: Construct the superlative form of a two-or-more syllable adjective by  
adding most before the adjective
Adjective Comparative Form Superlative Form Examples
beautiful more beautiful most beautiful The octopus is beautiful.  
The shark is more beautiful 
than the octopus. The fish is 
the most beautiful.
colorful more colorful most colorful The angelfish is colorful.  
The clownfish is more  
colorful than the angelfish. 
The lionfish is the most  
colorful.
6. Have students continue to compare and contrast the sea life mobiles using comparative and 
superlative adjectives. Students can use their surveys to help compare sea life mobiles. 

92 | UNIT III: SCULPTURE
Part Four: Sea Life Compare-and-Contrast Poem
1. To reinforce comparative adjectives and adjectives used to describe sea life, have students 
write a compare-and-contrast poem. The poem requires students to use adjectives to de -
scribe a topic and compare and contrast two different items.
2. Have students choose two sea animals, plants, or fish to write about in their poem. Students 
can refer to their sea life mobiles if needed. 
3. Give students time to research information about their sea life topics either on the Internet 
or with print materials such as books or magazines. 
4. Show students the pattern of a compare-and-contrast poem and do a class example on the 
board for students to see, using the example below as a model. If needed, review the use and 
construction of the comparative form of adjectives.
5. Next, brainstorm with students a list of adjectives to use in the poem. 
6. Give students time to write their poems. 
7. When students are finished, break them into pairs. 
8. Tell students to read their contrast poems to their partners, but delete one of the sea animals 
or plants from the poem. Their partner has to guess what the missing sea animal or plant is.
9. Ask for student volunteers to read their poem to the class, omitting one sea animal or plant 
from the poem. The class then has to guess the missing sea animal or plant.
Basic Pattern: Compare-and-Contrast Poem
Line 1: A is [comparative adjective] than B, 
Line 2: but B is [compar ative adjective] than A. 
Line 3: While A is [adjective], B is [comparative adjective]. 
Line 4: They are both [adjective] and [adjective], 
Line 5: but neither is [adjective] or [adjectiv e]. 
Example of a Compare-and-Contrast Poem:
A shark is meaner than a dolphin, 
but a dolphin is cuter than a shark. 
While a shark is smart, a dolphin is smarter .  
They are both magnificent and majestic, 
but neither is ugly or lowly.
Part Five: Exit Statement
1. To assess students’ learning and knowledge of comparative and superlative adjectives, re -
quire an exit ticket closing activity with students before they leave class. 
2. Have students line up. 
3. Give each student a different adjective. The student should tell you the comparative or super-
lative form. 

  | 93 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
Extension Activity: 
Sea Animal Poster Presentation 
Have students create a poster about a sea animal they used in their compare-and-contrast poems. 
Students should research characteristics of the sea animal, its habitat, what it likes to eat, and other 
unique qualities about the sea animal. Next, they should draw the sea animal or use an image from 
a website, magazine, or other print publication to include on their poster . When students present 
their posters, they can use the images to talk about their sea life animal. When students are finished 
constructing their posters, have a poster presentation. For the presentation, divide the class into 
two groups. Tell both groups to hang their posters up around the classroom. To begin, one half of the 
class will be the presenters, while the other half will be the audience. The audience should circulate 
around the room and ask the presenters questions about their posters and the sea animals depicted 
in them. The presenters should refer to the pictures and the images on their posters to answer the 
questions from the audience. After sufficient time, have the two groups switch roles. If needed, 
make surveys or sea life scavenger hunt worksheets to give students a framework for information 
they should be looking for during the presentation. 
Additional Resources:
Enchanted Learning’s art mobile resource page: see examples, images, and instructions for differ-
ent types of mobiles. 
http://www.enchantedlearning.com/crafts/mobiles/
The Monterey Bay Aquarium has many ocean and sea life resources on their website: animal fact 
cards, matching games, “I Spy” games, coloring pages, memory games, online books, crossword 
puzzles, tic-tac-toe, bingo, songs with lyrics, and information about science careers, animals, sea 
life, and the ocean. 
http://www.montereybayaquarium.org/lc/kids_place/
On the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s (NOAA) website you can find many ocean 
and sea life resources for students and teachers. They have facts and information about the ocean, 
fish, and reefs, as well as coloring pages, games, puzzles, word searches, and stories.
http://www.education.noaa.gov/socean.html
The Smithsonian’s Ocean Portal is an amazing site for teachers and students. Visit this site for fur-
ther lesson plans, photo journeys, multimedia, and more! 
http://ocean.si.edu/

94 | UNIT III: SCULPTURE
UNDERWATER CARTOON
Directions: With a partner, identify as many ocean creatures as you can.


  | 95 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
SEA LIFE


96 | UNIT III: SCULPTURE
THE SURVEY SAYS…
Teacher Directions: Reproduce this page and cut in half. Provide a survey to each student. Have 
them look at all the mobiles and then judge them with this survey sheet.
Sea Life Mobile Survey
Category Student’s Name
Most Colorful
Biggest Variety of Sea Plants
Biggest Variety of Sea Animals
Most Creative
Most Interesting/Intriguing
Other: ________________________
Sea Life Mobile Survey
Category Student’s Name
Most Colorful
Biggest Variety of Sea Plants
Biggest Variety of Sea Animals
Most Creative
Most Interesting/Intriguing
Other: ________________________

  | 97 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
LESSON 4
IMAGINARY CHARACTERS 
PART A
Meet the Wire People
Discussing actions in the present
Objective: Students will be able to use the present progressive verb tense to describe pres-
ent actions. 
Level: Intermediate 
Materials: Flexible wire or pipe cleaners, paper, pencils, photos of actions, glue or tape, 
scissors, and poster board or large sheets of paper .
Teacher Preparation: 1. For the warm-up activity, prepare two sets of cards. One set of cards 
has an image of the action. The second set of cards has the corresponding verb in the present 
progressive. Prepare enough cards for each student to have one card. Images are provided 
at the end of this lesson. 2. For Part Two, photocopy the pictures from the end of this lesson. 
Cut out each card, keeping them in their respective categories. Prepare the wire to be used to 
make the wire people like the ones in the example at the end of this lesson.
Art Options: If wire or pipe cleaners are not available, students can complete this activity as 
a drawing activity. Instead of sculpting an action with wire, students can draw an action with 
pencil, crayons, colored pencils, or markers.
*NOTE: Look for the complementary lesson plan on page 110. 
INSTRUCTIONS
Part One: Finding a Match 
1. Begin this activity by explaining t o students that they will receive a card with either an image 
of an action or a verb in the present progressive. The goal of this activity is for each student 
to find the match to his or her card. For example, if a student has an image of a child biking, 
then the student needs to find the other student who has the card with the corresponding 
sentence: The child is biking.
2. Before matching cards, students will walk around exchanging cards to mix the cards up be-
fore they are matched. This makes the game more challenging and fun as students should 
get a new card with a new action each time.

98 | UNIT III: SCULPTURE
3. Begin the game by saying “Go!” Students should walk around the room trading cards with 
each other . After the cards have been mixed up, say “Stop!” Students should stop trading 
cards and stand still. 
4. When everyone has stopped moving, call “Match,” and students should circulate around the 
room to find the person who has the match to their card. If they have a picture on their card, 
they need to find the student with the corresponding present progressive verb written on a 
card. If they have a verb written on their card, they have to find the student with the picture 
that demonstrates the verb. 
5. When every student has found their match, call “Go!” again and the game continues with 
students exchanging cards in order to mix them up. 
6. Mix-and-Match variation: If ther e is an odd number of students, there are a few options to 
play the game. One option is to have the extra student be the assistant, calling “Go,” “Stop,” 
and “Match.” Another option is to make enough cards so that all students have a card (result-
ing in an odd number of cards). Whoever is the last person to find a match, after “Match” is 
called is out. Each round one student should be out until there is one student left. 
Part Two: Making Wire Sculptures
1. Review the form and function of the present progressive tense with students. Hold up a pic-
ture and have students say what is happening (e.g., She is dancing). 
The Present Progressive
This tense is used to show actions or events which are in progress 
and are NOT finished.
Do NOT use the present progressive with non-action verbs  
(e.g., I am liking).
BE + Base form of action verb
+ -ing
I am listening to music.
We are eating.
She is studying.
The baby is sleeping.
They are painting.
2. Put students into four groups. Give each group a set of pictures with a common theme, for 
example, sports, outdoors, eating, or school activities. Ask groups to create a sentence for 
each picture using the present progressive tense (e.g., She is dancing). 
3. Once groups have had enough time to write their sentences, have each group share their 
sentences with the class. Make a list on the board of all the sentences. 
4. Review the list as a class. To reinforce the vocabulary, ask student volunteers to act out the 
verbs for the whole class. 
5. Assign students to pairs.
6. Tell students to each choose one verb from the class-generated list to create a wire sculpture.
7. Demonstrat e to students how to bend the wire or pipe cleaners to make the main part of the 
body, the torso, and then to create the head, arms, and legs. Details, such as feet and hands, 
should be constructed last. (If needed, review parts of the body with students.) 

  | 99 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
8. Show students the pipe cleaner sculpture examples included in the Examples of Wire People 
section at the end of this lesson.
9. Pass out wire or pipe cleaners to students. Give students time to experiment with using this 
media.
10. Students can then f ocus on bending the wire or pipe cleaners to demonstrate an action. Have 
students model their partner’s action to see what the arms, legs, or body looks like while 
performing that action.
11. After pairs have finished making their wire sculptures, put students into new groups of four 
and pass out more pipe cleaners to each group.
12. Each student will give instructions about how to make his or her wire sculpture to the other 
three students in the group without letting the group members see his or her wire sculpture. 
The other group members should follow the directions to re-create the wire sculpture. 
13. Repeat Step T welve until all students in each group have the opportunity to instruct their 
group members in the creation of a wire sculpture and to create three new wire sculptures. 
14. After each student has given instructions on how to create his or her wire sculpture, all stu-
dents should share what their original sculpture looks like.
15. Students can c ompare the original and their sculptures and write down the main differences.
16. Groups should then choose one of the sculptures made by their group that they think is most 
interesting. The student who made this sculpture should then show it to the class and have 
other members of the class guess what the sculpture is doing. 
17. The class c an then vote on which of the sculptures presented by the group is the most inter-
esting.
Part Three: Practicing Present Progressive with Charades
1. When students have completed their action sculptures, have students play present progres-
sive charades. This activity can be done in groups or as a class, depending on the class size. 
2. To play charades, write the actions depicted in the students’ sculptures on strips of paper . 
If your class is small, you may want to add some additional action prompts to give students 
more options. Prompts may include laughing at a joke, eating a sandwich, painting a picture, 
conducting an orchestra, drinking tea, playing the piano, or swatting a fly.
3. Have one student pick a prompt. The student must act out the prompt. 
4. The student’s group members take turns guessing the action in the allotted amount of time. 
(You could start with two minutes.) If the group guesses the action correctly in the time limit, 
they get a point. If the group does not guess the action correctly, the other groups may guess. 
The first group to correctly guess the action gets a point.
5. Repeat Step F our with other groups until all prompts have been used. The group with the 
most points wins.
Part Four: Exit Ticket Closing Activity
1. Have students line up before leaving class. Say a present progressive verb to each student. 
The student then has to quickly demonstrate or act out the verb to show he or she knows the 
meaning. Tell students they can say “pass” once, if you give them a verb they do not know or 
they don’t want to act out the verb. 

100 | UNIT III: SCULPTURE
Extension Activities:
Guess that Sketch Game Using Present Progressive
After students have completed their wire sculptures, write the actions depicted in the students’ 
sculptures on strips of paper . If your class is small, you may want to add some additional action 
prompts to give students more options or to incorporate new vocabulary. Paper and pencils, pens, or 
markers should be provided for students to draw. One by one, students take turns choosing a strip of 
paper and then drawing the action. This drawing should only be a quick sketch to give the other stu-
dents a general idea. After the drawing is finished, the rest of the group guesses what action is being 
depicted. Students must give guesses in a complete sentence: She is dancing. This game can also be 
played competitively: Divide the class into two teams. Students from each team take turns drawing 
the action for their team. If the team whose student is drawing is unable to provide the correct an -
swer, the other team gets a chance to guess. Give one point for each correct answer and keep track 
of these points. When all the sentence strips have been used, the team with the most points wins.
Creating a Group Story
Have the students use pipe cleaners to create any shape, animal, or other object that they want. 
Put them in groups of five or six and have them try to guess what each other’s creations are. Have 
groups try to put all of the creations together to create one scene and develop some way to connect 
the objects into a story. One student can begin by saying a sentence about his or her object. The next 
student can connect his or her object to the previous students’ idea. For example, the first student 
could say, “This is my dog.” The second student could say, “Your dog bit my star .” Put two groups 
together and have them tell each other their stories. Optional: Reassign groups and have students 
repeat the activity.
K-W-L-S
Have students write four categories on a piece of paper: K-Know, W-Want to know, L-Learned, S-
Still want to know (or unsure of). Students should write present progressive verbs under each of 
these four categories. The K-W-L-S activity is a good way for students to reflect on their learning 
and also a good assessment tool for you to see which present progressive verbs students are still 
struggling with. 
Additional Resource:
For more mature learners, there are many ideas for creating more complicated wire figures. Here is 
a good website that provides a description of how to make more complex wire figures. Students can 
work in small groups to create more sophisticated wire figures.
http://www.bartelart.com/arted/wiresculpture.htm

  | 101 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
ACTION CARDS PART ONE
Teacher Directions: These images are for Part One. Cut out these photos and paste each photo on a 
note card. On a separate note card, write the action that is occurring using the present progressive. 
For example: She is listening to music.


102 | UNIT III: SCULPTURE
ACTION CARDS PART ONE


  | 103 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
ACTION CARDS PART TWO
Teacher Directions: Keeping these photos in their respective categories, cut out the images and 
give each group a set of pictures. Students are to create a sentence using the present progressive 
for each image and then present their images and sentences to the class.
SPORTS


104 | UNIT III: SCULPTURE
ACTION CARDS PART TWO
FOOD


  | 105 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
ACTION CARDS PART TWO


106 | UNIT III: SCULPTURE
ACTION CARDS PART TWO
SCHOOL


  | 107 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
ACTION CARDS PART TWO
OUTDOORS


108 | UNIT III: SCULPTURE
ACTION CARDS PART TWO


  | 109 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
EXAMPLES OF WIRE PEOPLE


110 | UNIT III: SCULPTURE
LESSON 5
IMAGINARY CHARACTERS  
PART B
Robot Fun
Storytelling using simple past and past progressive
Objective: Students will create a robot using recycled materials and use this to write a story 
using personality characteristics, simple past tense, and past progressive. 
Level: Intermediate to Advanced
Materials: Glue and recycled cardboard for the base and various recycled items. Materials 
can include, but are not limited to, old CDs, wires, recycled computer or electronic parts, 
nails, screws, washers, bolts, buttons, plastic bottles, and coins.
Teacher Preparation: 1. Gather materials to be used for the activity. If necessary, ask stu-
dents or other teachers to bring in recycled materials from home. 2. Cut cardboard pieces 
into uniform sizes. Each student will need a flat piece of cardboard to use as the base for 
their recycled robot (if students are creating three-dimensional robots). 3. Duplicate the blank 
character cards included in the Reproducible Worksheets section of this activity, or create your 
own. One card is needed for every student. 4. Duplicate or create your own place/time cards 
and event cards. 5. Create a model based on the art instructions below to show students. 
Art Options: If recycled electronic or construction materials are not available, this activ-
ity can be completed as a drawing, painting, or collage activity. Students can use the robot 
pictures at the end of this lesson as inspiration to design, draw, or paint an imaginary robot, 
or if collage materials are available, students can cut out various objects and arrange them 
to create a robot collage.
INSTRUCTIONS
Part One: What Would a Robot Do? Acting Warm-Up Activity 
1. Intr oduce or review the word robot with students. Ask students if they have ever read any 
books or have ever seen any movies about robots. Questions to ask might include:
What did the robots look like? 
How did the robot act? 
Could the robot talk?
What did the robot do in the book or movie? 
 If needed, e xplain to students that a robot is a machine or device that operates and performs 
various functions either automatically or by remote control. 
2. Sho w students the robot images included at the end of this lesson. 

  | 111 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
3. Br eak students up into small groups. Write robot prompts on strips of paper . Prompts may 
include a robot playing soccer, dancing, cooking, or playing tennis.
4. Hav e each group pick a prompt. Tell groups to act out the situation listed on the prompt. Re -
mind them that robots generally move in a stiff or mechanical manner . 
5. Aft er a few minutes, have groups act out their prompts in front of the class. The class has to 
guess what action is being depicted. 
6. If time permits, have groups pick new prompts and act them out again. Alternatively, have 
each group write a prompt. Groups can then switch prompts with another group and act out 
the situation. 
Part Two: Constructing the Recycled Robot
1. Aft er seeing robot images and acting like a robot, students will create their own robots using 
recycled materials. If a model robot has been made prior to teaching this lesson, show this to 
the students. 
2. Display mat erials for the project on a desk or table. Have students take turns selecting ma-
terials for their recycled robot. 
3. Demons trate to students how materials can be arranged in various ways to make the body, 
arms, legs, and head of a robot. 
4. Students c an use the robot images on page 113 for ideas and inspiration. 
5. Hand out a cardboard base to each student. Advise students to experiment with arranging 
their materials in different ways before they decide on a design they like best. Remind stu -
dents that their robots should have a head, torso, arms, and legs. If needed, review parts of 
the body with students.
6. Ask s tudents to think about which smaller materials they can use for details such as facial 
features or accessories. 
7. When s tudents decide on their robot design, they can begin gluing the parts of their robots to 
the cardboard base. (In some instances strong glue may be required.) 
8. If s tudents are creating a three-dimensional robot with recycled plastic and cardboard, they 
can use tape or glue to connect the robot parts together . 
9. Hav e students put their recycled robots someplace safe for the glue to dry. 
Part Three: Storytelling with the Robots
1. Onc e students have completed their recycled robots, have students fill out a character card 
about their robot. (A character card worksheet is provided at the end of this lesson, or you 
may create other character cards for students to use.) The character card will be used with 
the place/time cards and event cards to develop the framework of a creative story. 
2. Ask s tudents to brainstorm adjectives that describe personality traits and compile a list on 
the board. The list might include shy, outgoing, nervous, proud, aggressive, passive, or silly. In 
some cases, students may have already determined the personality of their robot by the de-
sign. For example, if a student designed his or her robot to have a mean look on its face, then 
the student could write mean or aggressive under the personality trait category on his char -
acter card; if a student made a funny-looking robot, the students might write silly or goofy for 
the personality trait.

112 | UNIT III: SCULPTURE
3. When students have completed their character cards, collect them and place them in a pile.
4. Make a second pile of the place/time cards and a third pile of the event cards. (See the Teach-
er Preparation instructions at the beginning of this lesson plan.) 
5. Demonstrat e to students how to create a framework for a story. Pick one card from each pile 
(a character card, a place/time card, and an event card) and use them as a basic structure for 
telling or writing a story. 
6. Have students break up into their groups. Tell groups to pick one card from each pile. Instruct 
the groups to then tell or write a story about something that happened in the past, using the 
cards they chose. For example, if a group chooses the story cards a goofy robot, at a rock con-
cert, and aliens start attacking, those phrases should help organize the story and must appear 
in it. 
7. Remind students to use the simpl e past or past progressive tenses. 
8. Ask for volunteers from the groups to share their stories with the whole class. If desired, 
group members can act out the story while one group member narrates. 
9. If time permits, have groups pick ne w cards and create a new story. 
Part Four: If I Had a Real Robot… Free Writing Closing Activity
1. As a closing activity, ask students to imagine what they would have their robots do and then 
free-write about this. For example, students might write about having their robot do their 
chores, such as clean their bedroom, wash the dishes, or take out the garbage; or students 
might want their robot to do their homework, play tricks on their brothers or sisters, or play 
video games with them. Remind students that their free writing will not be graded, that it is 
just practice in writing creatively. 
Extension Activity:
Class Robot
For another activity, you will need a student to volunteer to be the class robot. Provide a blindfold or 
have the student close his or her eyes. The other students should provide oral directions, such as 
walk straight, turn right, reach down, pick up the chalk, or write two words on the blackboard. 
Additional Resources:
Enchanted Learning’s robot resource page provides other robot activity ideas and robot worksheets. 
http://www.enchantedlearning.com/themes/robot.shtml
The Smithsonian’s National Air and Space Museum website is a good place to look for robot-  
related materials. 
http://www.nasm.si.edu/

  | 113 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
AMAZING ROBOTS!


114 | UNIT III: SCULPTURE
CONVERSATION CARDS
Teacher Directions: Make copies of the cards, then cut them out and place them in an envelope for 
each group. Each envelope should have a set from each category.
Place/Time Cards:
submarine space ship
roller coaster rock concert
Other place/time ideas: stuck in an elevator, at the zoo, in a taxi, on a date, etc.

  | 115 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
CONVERSATION CARDS
Event Cards:
The computer is 
not working. There is no noise.
Aliens are  
attacking. The power is out.
Other event ideas: A tiger escaped from the zoo. A picture came to life. Hearing laughter coming 
from a strange place. 

116 | UNIT III: SCULPTURE
CONVERSATION CARDS
Character Cards:
(To be completed by students about their individual robots.)
Name of Robot:
Personality Traits:
Name of Robot:
Personality Traits:
Name of Robot:
Personality Traits:
Name of Robot:
Personality Traits:

  | 117 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
LESSON 6
OBJECTS
Reduce, Reuse, Recycle
Recycled magazine bowls and informational 
interviews using quantifiers
Objective: Students will create a recycled magazine bowl and then conduct an interview us-
ing adverbs of frequency. 
Level: Beginner to Intermediate 
Materials: Old magazines, cardboard sticks one inch wide by twelve inches long, clear tape, 
and glue.
Teacher Preparation: 1. Collect cardboard and old magazines to use for this activity. 2. Cut 
cardboard into sticks one inch wide by twelve inches long. Cut enough so that each student 
has a stick. 3. (Optional) Make a magazine bowl to show students as an example. 
Art Options: If magazines are not available, this activity can be modified by having students 
draw or paint posters about reducing, reusing, or recycling. The posters can outline steps 
to recycling plastic or metal, offer suggestions on how to reuse certain goods, or generate 
ideas for reducing waste and consumption.
INSTRUCTIONS
Part One: Reduce, Reuse, Recycle Warm-Up Activity 
1. Introduce or review these words: reduce, reuse, and recycle with students. Reduce means to 
make something smaller in amount, size, or price. Reuse means to use something again. 
Recycle means to put materials or objects through a process to be used again. 
2. Make a sign for each word: reduce, reuse, and recycle. 
3. Put the three signs in diff erent locations in the classroom. 
4. Tell students you will read an example that demonstrates the meaning of reduce, reuse, or 
recycle. Students must decide which word the sentence demonstrates and then go stand 
under, or next to, that sign. For example, if you say, “I cut up old t-shirts and use them as 
cleaning rags,” students should stand under the sign that says reuse.
5. Example sentences that can be modified, added to, or omitted to fit the needs of your stu -
dents could be: 
I turn the water off while brushing my teeth. (Reduce) 
I never throw away old batteries. I find a business that will take them. (Recycle)
I cut up old paper into squares and make small notepads with them. (Reuse)

118 | UNIT III: SCULPTURE
I ride my bike to work instead of driving my car . (Reduce)
I always bring my own mug, or travel mug, when I go to a coffee shop. (Reduce) 
I donate unwanted or old clothes to charities. (Reuse)
I always turn the lights off when I leave a room. (Reduce)
I separate cans and plastic bottles from the garbage. (Recycle)
6. When students choose a sign to stand under or next to, ask specific students to explain their 
choices. 
7. Reveal the correct answer to students and discuss why the sentence demonstrates reducing, 
reusing, or recycling. 
Part Two: Making Magazine Bowls
1. Tell students they will be reducing waste in this project by recycling and reusing magazines. 
2. Pass out magazines to students and have students tear out the pages. Tell students to try to 
rip out the whole sheet of magazine paper and not rip the pages in half or pieces. Also, ask 
them to rip out pages with bright, vibrant colors. 
3. Demonstr ate to students how to wrap the paper around the cardboard stick. Place the stick 
at a corner of the magazine page and wrap the paper around the stick. Crease and fold the 
magazine paper each time you turn the stick. Continue wrapping the paper around the stick 
until there is no more paper . Then, pull out the stick and tape the corner of the rolled piece of 
paper so that it does not unroll. See Diagram A below. 
A
 B
4. Roll the wrapped sheet of magazine paper int o a coil. Make sure the strip is rolled very tight. 
Tape the end of the coil so that the paper does not unravel. See Diagram B above. 
5. Wrap another sheet of magazine paper around the cardboard stick (Diagram A) and add it to 
the coil of magazine paper where the last magazine strip ended (Diagram B). 
6. Repeat Step Fiv e until you have a large coil of wrapped magazine paper .
7. Begin to shape the coil into a bowl by pushing the middle of the coil down and pulling up the 
sides. 

  | 119 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
8. Pour glue into small containers. (Choose a type of glue that dries clear .) Have students use 
old paintbrushes to brush glue over one side of the magazine bowl. When the glue dries, turn 
the bowl over and brush glue onto the other side. The glue helps protect and hold the maga-
zine bowl together, while also creating a glossy finish. 
Part Three: Adverbs of Frequency Interview
1. Review the vocabulary introduced in Part One: reduce, reuse and recycle. If needed, demon-
strate the meaning of the words by giving students examples of ways to reduce, reuse, and 
recycle. 
For example:  I reduce my time in the shower to save water . 
   I reuse old t-shirts by cutting them up and using them to cl ean. 
   I recycle plastic bottl es and cans by turning them into art.
2. Review adverbs of frequency with students. Organize them on the board to illustrate to stu -
dents that always usually refers to something that happens 100% of the time and never usu-
ally refers to something that happens 0% of the time.
always often sometimes rarely seldom never
100% 0%
3. Use the adverbs in sentences to help s tudents comprehend their meaning. 
For example:  I always recycle plastic bottles. 
I sometimes conserve electricity and remember to turn off the lights when 
they are not needed.
   I never litter or thro w garbage on the ground.
4. Next, break students up into pairs. Tell pairs that they will interview their partners about how 
often they reduce, reuse, or recycle, using the questions provided in the Reproducible Work-
sheet. 
5. One student should ask questions while the other student answers the questions using the 
appropriate adverb of frequency. The student who asks the questions should record his or 
her classmate’s answers. 
6. Have partners switch roles after all questions have been asked. Adapt or modify the ques -
tions in the worksheet as needed. 
7. When students have each had a turn being the interviewer and the interviewee, ask students 
to report their findings. Draw the chart on the following page on the whiteboard or chalk -
board. Have students take turns going up to the board and putting a tally mark for the adverb 
of frequency their partners used in each question. 

120 | UNIT III: SCULPTURE
Always Often Sometimes Seldom Rarely Never
Question 1
Question 2
Question 3
Question 4
Question 5
Question 6
Question 7
Question 8
Question 9
Question 10
Question 11
8. When each student has report ed his or her findings, use the chart to help students draw 
conclusions about reducing, reusing, or recycling. For example, if there are four tally marks 
under always and six tally marks under sometimes for question one, you would say, “Four 
people in this class always recycle newspapers, but six people in this class sometimes re -
cycle newspapers.” Demonstrate this structure a few times. 
9. Have students work in small groups to make their own conclusions from the chart. Ask each 
group to share with the class the most interesting or surprising conclusions they made. 
10. For questions that have a lot of tally marks for rarely or never, have groups brainstorm ideas 
and things they can do to encourage students to reduce, reuse, or recycle more. 
Part Four: Free Writing Closing Activity
1. As a closing activity, ask students to reflect and write about reducing, reusing, or recycling. 
Ask students to write about which question in the interview is most important to do and why. 
Extension Activity:
Recycle! Persuasive Speech or Poster
Brainstorm ideas with students about things they can do to help the environment. Create a list with 
the ideas students provide. Some examples include conserving energy or recycling newspapers, 
plastic items, or aluminum cans. Afterwards, students can write a persuasive speech or essay that 
encourages the audience to reduce, reuse, or recycle, or students can make posters to hang up 
around the school, or in public buildings, to bring awareness to the problem(s). 

  | 121 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
Additional Resources: 
Visit the Environmental Protection Agency’s Recycle City website to learn more about recycling in 
your community.
http://www.epa.gov/recyclecity/
Learn more about your global carbon footprint by visiting the Global Footprint Network’s website. 
http://footprintnetwork.org/en/index.php/GFN/


122 | UNIT III: SCULPTURE
REDUCE, REUSE, RECYCLE!
Word Bank
always often sometimes seldom rarely never
1. How often do you recycle newspapers? 
 I _______________ recy cle newspapers.
2. How often do you recycle plastic bottles and aluminum cans? 
 I _______________ recy cle plastic bottles and aluminum cans.
3. How often do you recycle plastic bags or reuse them? 
 I ______________ reuse or r ecycle plastic bags. 
4. How often do you recycle cardboard boxes? 
 I _______________ recy cle cardboard boxes. 
5. When you brush your teeth, do you leave the water running? 
 When I brush my teeth I __________________ l eave the water running.
6. How often do you litter? 
 I _____________________ litter or dr op my trash on the ground.
7. How often do you walk or ride a bike to school? 
 I _____________________ walk or ride a bike.
8. Do you try to conserve energy at home by turning off lights? 
 I ____________________ try to c onserve energy at home by turning off lights. 
9. How often do you (or does your family) buy food from local farmers? 
 I (We) _______________ buy locally produced food.
10. Do you waste food? 
 I _____________________ wast e food. 
11. Do you (or does your family) grow your own food? 
 I (We) ______________________ grow my (our) own food.

  | 123 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
  
Mixed media refers to an art technique that combines two 
or more art media. For example, a mixed media artwork 
can combine painting and collage or painting and sculp-
ture. By combining art media and techniques, students are 
provided with many avenues for expression, exploration, 
and experimentation while using English. 
Tips for Mixed Media
• Combine materials. 
 There are limitless opportunities for combining and mixing art media or materials. Several 
possibilities are suggested throughout this chapter . Feel free to adapt, alter, or modify the 
suggestions listed in each activity depending on the materials at hand. Each activity also 
provides options for completing the activity with minimal materials. Some ideas for mixed 
media artwork include: 
• Collage, plus incorpor ating details on the collage with pencils, markers, or paint. 
• Paint, with collage elements glued or pasted to the painting. 
• Bookmaking, with drawings inside the book. 
• Printmaking with simple t ools such as hard vegetables or sponges. (Information on 
printmaking is included in Appendix B.) 
• Use recycled materials. 
 Recycled materials — items that have been used before and can be repurposed — can be 
utilized in many mixed media art projects. Teachers may collect some from personal be-
longings or ask students to bring in recycled materials to use in the mixed media activities. 
Recycled materials can include cardboard, shoe boxes, cereal boxes, brown paper bags, 
recycled papers and magazines, or recycled containers such as glass and plastic jars. 
Medium
Various: Drawing, Painting, Sculpture, Printmaking, Collage

124 | UNIT IV: MIXED MEDIA
Mixed Media Materials
This is a list of all the materials that can be used in working with mixed media. Each lesson plan 
in this chapter will have a list of the specific materials needed to complete that particular project 
with suggestions for variations in case different resources are on hand. 
Required  
• Adhesive: glue or tape 
• Paper  
• Pencil  
• Cardboard (recycled) 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Optional
• Brushes
• Colored pencils 
• Crayons
• Magazines (old or recycled magazines)
• Markers
• Materials from nature: grass, straw,   
 twigs, sand, small rocks, leaves, etc.  
• Newspaper
• Recyclable materials
• Glass or plastic jars
• Scissors
• Sponges
• Tempera paint
• Vegetables

  | 159 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
Acrostic (Word Poem) 
A type of poem usually made by spelling a 
word or name vertically and then using each 
letter of the word or name to write a phrase or 
adjective.
Example Acrostic Poem:
Curious sights, sounds, and smells.
Interesting and fascinating buildings and places.
Tons of new things to see.
Yes! Let’s take a trip to the city!
Background
The part of a picture that seems the farthest 
away from the person viewing the picture, or 
the ground or scenery located behind  
something.
Below, the island is in the background, or  
back of the picture, and the boats are in the  
foreground, or front of the picture. 
Cardstock
A type of thick, heavy paper . Cardstock is 
heavier and thicker than normal (computer) 
paper, and construction paper, but lighter 
than cardboard.
Cellophane
A type of transparent paper made from plastic. 
It can be clear or colored and is water- and 
oil-resistant. Cellophane is usually used to 
wrap candy, food, and gifts. The wrapper on 
this gift is cellophane.


160 | GLOSSARY
Clear Tape 
A type of adhesive used to bond paper  
together . It is not strong enough to bond  
heavier items together such as cardboard or 
fabric. Clear tape is usually transparent.
Colored Paper
Any kind of paper that is a color other than 
white. Colored paper can be used in creating 
a collage, for a background of a picture, or for 
the picture itself. 
Comic Strip
Groups of pictures that tell a story. Comic 
strips can also have words to help tell the 
story. The story is usually funny, or “comic”.
Composition
The plan, organization, or arrangement of the 
elements in a work of art. When artists think 
about the composition of their artwork, they 
think about the arrangement of the subjects 
in the artwork, the size of the subjects, the 
colors used, and so on.
Computer Paper
A type of lightweight paper most commonly 
used for everyday printing or for drawing with 
pencils, crayons, colored pencils or markers. 
Construction Paper
A type of paper thicker than computer paper, 
but not as stiff or thick as cardstock.  
Construction paper generally comes in a  
wide variety of colors and can be used in  
arts and crafts in many different ways.


  | 161 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
Crayon Resist 
An artwork that is created by using wax  
crayons and a water-based medium (usually 
paint) that will repel the crayon. The paint will 
not stick to the crayon, so the crayon remains 
visible through the paint.
Diorama
A three-dimensional picture or scene.  
A diorama can incorporate a wide variety  
of materials.
Fabrics
Types of cloth made by weaving, knitting, or 
crocheting natural or synthetic fibers together . 
Fabrics come in all types of textures, colors, 
and sizes. Common fabrics include canvas, 
cotton, felt, burlap, lace, nylon, and velvet. 
Foreground
The part of the picture that appears to be the 
closest to the person viewing the picture.
Below, the boats are in the foreground, or 
front of the picture, and the island is in the 
background, or back of the picture. 
Glue
A type of liquid adhesive used primarily to 
bond two thin objects together, such as pieces 
of paper . 
Glue Stick
A type of adhesive. A glue stick is glue in solid 
form. It can be used to bond two thin objects 
together, such as pieces of yarn or paper .


162 | GLOSSARY
Hot Glue 
A type of adhesive used to bond different ma-
terials together, such as fabric, cardboard, or 
plastic. Hot glue is turned into an adhesive by 
melting the glue with a hot glue gun. Hot glue 
should be used with caution as the melted 
glue can burn skin when it comes into contact 
with it. 
Hot Glue Gun
A machine that melts a solid adhesive (hot 
glue sticks).
Markers
A type of drawing tool made out of colored ink. 
Some markers have permanent ink, which can 
stain hands or clothes, while other types are 
made with washable ink so that students do 
not stain their hands or clothes.  
Masking Tape
A type of adhesive that is usually thin and  
easy to tear . It is stronger than clear tape. 
Masking tape can be used with paper,  
cardboard, or plastic. 
Matte
A type of texture that is dull, not shiny or 
glossy.  
Mind Map
A visual graphic that is used to brainstorm  
and organize ideas around a certain theme 
or subject. Pictures and words are generally 
written or drawn around the central idea or 
theme and then linked to other ideas.


  | 163 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
Mobile 
A sculpture made by assembling objects  
together and balancing or arranging them in  
a manner in which they can move freely.  
Non-Toxic
Indicates that the ingredients used in making  
a certain art supply are not poisonous to  
humans. 
Overlap
When one part of one object lies on top of 
another object, partly covering up part of the 
object. 
For example, the papers in this collage are 
overlapping one another . 
Paint Roller
A tool used to apply paint or ink evenly and 
consistently on a surface.  
Paper Fasteners
Metal objects that are used to fasten two or 
more pieces of paper through holes punched 
in the paper .  
Perspective
The technique of representing items in the 
foreground as larger than items in the  
background in order to create the illusion  
of depth, or receding space, on a two- 
dimensional surface.  


164 | GLOSSARY
Pipe Cleaners
Flexible, fabric-coated wires that can be  
twisted and bent to create a variety of different  
shapes. Pipe cleaners can also be joined  
together by twisting the wires together . 
Portrait
Any piece of art that captures the image of a 
person or people (usually the face). Portraits 
can be created with drawing, painting,  
photography, and even sculpture.
Poster Board
A type of paper that is generally larger and 
thicker than normal paper . It is similar to 
cardstock, but larger in size. It can be used to 
make large posters, projects, or signs. 
Primary Colors
The three basic colors that cannot be mixed 
or formed by any combination of other colors. 
The primary colors are red, blue, and yellow.  
From mixing these three primary colors all 
other colors can be created. Refer to  
Appendix A for an explanation of primary,  
secondary, and tertiary colors and color mixing.  
Recycled Materials
Any material that has previously been used 
and can be used again for an additional  
purpose. For art activities, recycled materials  
such as cardboard, magazine paper, glass 
jars, or metal baking sheets can be used.   
Secondary Colors
The colors made from mixing two primary  
colors together . The secondary colors are 
green, purple, and orange. Refer to Appendix A  
for an explanation of primary, secondary, and 
tertiary colors and color mixing.


  | 165 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
Shade 
A color made by adding and mixing black to 
any color . See Appendix A for a more detailed 
explanation. 
Silhouette
The outline of a person, animal, or object that 
is filled with a solid color such as black. 
Sketch
A quick drawing usually done to prepare or 
plan a more detailed artwork.   
Tempera Paint
A water-based paint that dries quickly with 
a matte finish. Tempera paints can usually 
be purchased in powdered or liquid form and 
are appropriate for students of all ages. Make 
sure the label on the paint specifies it is non-
toxic and safe for student use.  
Tertiary Colors
Colors that are created by mixing one primary 
color with one secondary color . For example, 
yellow mixed with orange creates yellow-
orange. Refer to Appendix A for an explanation 
of primary, secondary, and tertiary colors and 
color mixing.
   
Texture
How something feels to the touch. Rough, 
smooth, and bumpy are words that describe 
different textures.
Timeline
A line that is drawn to represent events in  
sequential order . Generally a timeline  
represents historical accounts. The events are 
indicated by dots or slashes on the line.


166 | GLOSSARY
Tint 
A color made by adding and mixing white  
with any color . See Appendix A for a detailed 
explanation. 
Tissue Paper
A type of very thin paper that you can see 
through. 
Watercolor Paint
A type of water-based paint, produced by  
mixing water with pigments. Watercolor paints 
are appropriate for students of all ages. They 
usually come in a tray, with squares of dry 
color pigments. Water can then be added to 
the dry pigment to paint.


  | 167 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
Adding Color 
If color materials are available, students can add color to their drawing with a variety of materials. 
Crayons, markers, colored pencils, or paint can be used to add color, detail, and richness to the 
drawings students create. Color can not only enhance the artwork students create, but also provide 
students with increased opportunities for descriptive adjective and vocabulary use related to color .
Tips for Adding Color/Painting:
• Make sure the materials are safe and appropriate for student use.
 If using marker s or paint, make sure the markers or paint are non-toxic and safe for student 
use. 
• Paints for students:
o Tempera Paint — Tempera paint is appropriate for students of all ages. It is a water-
based paint that dries quickly with a matte finish. Tempera paint can usually be pur -
chased in powdered or liquid form.
o Watercolor Paint — Watercolor paint is also appropriate for students of all ages. Wa-
tercolor is a water-based paint, produced by mixing water with pigments. Watercolor 
paints usually come in a tray, with squares of various color pigments. 
• Save time by “drawing” in color first.
 If you are using crayons, colored pencils, makers, or paint, you can save time by having your 
students draw or paint with such materials first, rather than drawing in pencil and then add-
ing color .
• Colors can mix when combined, layered, or touched. 
 When colors are combined, touched, or layered they will mix. For example, when crayons or 
colored pencils are layered on top of one another, the two colors will show a new color . When 
two colors of paint are mixed together, the two colors will create a new color . It is beneficial 
to know about color mixing because you may have limited colors available, but by showing 
students how to mix or layer colors or paints, students can create other colors to use in their 
artwork. Basic information on mixing and creating colors is listed below.

168 | APPENDIX
Primary Colors: RED, BLUE, YELLOW 
Primary colors are the three basic colors that cannot be mixed or formed by any com-
bination of other colors. From these three primary colors you can mix and create all 
other colors. 
Secondary Colors: ORANGE, PURPLE (Violet), GREEN 
Secondary colors are created by mixing the primary colors. 
• RED mixed with YELLOW creates ORANGE
• RED mixed with BLUE creates PURPLE
• BLUE mixed with YELLOW creates GREEN 
Tertiary Colors: YELLOW-ORANGE, YELLOW-GREEN, RED-ORANGE, RED-PURPLE, BLUE-GREEN, 
BLUE-PURPLE 
Tertiary colors are created by mixing a primary with a secondary color . The tertiary colors have two-
word names which indicate the primary and secondary colors used to create them. 
• YELLOW mixed with ORANGE creates YELLOW-ORANGE
• YELLOW mixed with GREEN creates YELLOW-GREEN
• RED mixed with ORANGE creates RED-ORANGE
• RED mixed with PURPLE creates RED-PURPLE
• BLUE mixed with GREEN creates BLUE-GREEN
• BLUE mixed with PURPLE creates BLUE-PURPLE 
Tints and Shades
A tint can be made by adding and mixing white with any 
color . A shade can be made by adding black to any color . 
Color Wheel
The color wheel shows the primary, secondary, and tertiary colors in relation 
to one another .


  | 169 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
Printmaking 
Printmaking is the process of creating a picture, shape, mark, or design by applying color (print -
ing ink or paint) to a printing tool and then pressing the tool onto a flat surface. The picture, shape, 
mark, or design is transferred from the tool to the surface. Most prints can be produced repeatedly 
by reapplying color to the printing tool. 
o Printing “t ools” can vary. This activity book utilizes printing tools such as hard veg -
etables, like potatoes, or old sponges. 

170 | APPENDIX
Sculpting Dough 
Sculpting dough can be purchased at arts and crafts stores or made with the recipes below. 
Sculpting Dough Recipe #1
Ingredients: 
• 1 cup flour
• 1/2 cup salt
• 1/2 cup water
• (optional) Food col oring to give the dough color
Directions: 
1. Mix ingredients well until the y form a ball. 
2. Knead the dough and add food col oring if desired. 
3. If the dough is too sticky, add a bit of flour . If too dry, add a few drops of water .
Sculpting Dough Recipe #2
Ingredients: 
• 1 cup cold water 
• 1 cup salt 
• 2 teaspoons vegetable oil 
• Tempera paint or food coloring 
• 3 cups flour 
• 2 tablespoons cornstarch
Directions:
1. In a bowl, mix water, salt, oil, and enough tempera paint or food coloring to make a bright 
color . 
2. Gradually add flour and cornstarch until the mixture reaches the consistency of bread dough. 
3. Cover the dough to store it. 