4 | CONTENTS
Theme Lesson and 
P age Number Grammar Vocabulary Academic Skills Proficiency Level
COLLAGE
Neighborhoods:  
It’s Important to Me
Page 46
• Future tense using will • Community and
world events
• Making goals
• Making and
r
esponding to
su
ggestions
• Political issues
• Brainstorming
• Predicting
• Using inference
• Researching
• Presenting to an
audience
• Focused listening
Intermediate to 
Advanced
Space:  
Reflecting Patterns
Page 51
• Contrastive nouns
• Descriptive adjectives
• Present participles
• Imperatives
• Opposites
• Making and
r
esponding to
dir
ections
• Focused listening
• Evaluating
• Poem writing
Intermediate to 
Advanced
Earth:  
The Earth around Me
Page 56
• Similes
• Simple present: be
• Descriptive
ad
jectives
• Nature
• Evaluating
• Focused listening
• Reviewing
High Beginner to 
Int
ermediate
Jackets:  
Do You Judge a Book 
by Its Cover?
Page 60
• Wh- Questions
• Simple present
• Present continuous
• Learning resources
• Parts of a paragraph
• Interpreting
• Note taking
• Predicting
• Reviewing
• Scanning
• Skimming
• Surveying
• Peer review
Intermediate
Shelters:  
Community Lessons
Page 66
• Imperatives
• Prepositions of place
• Directions
• Buildings
• Explaining
• Focused listening
• Presenting
Beginner to 
Int
ermediate

CREATEtoCommunicate
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom 
Published by:
Office of English Language Programs
Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs
United States Department of State
Washington, D.C. 20037
americanenglish.state.gov

First Edition: 2013
 ISBN (print) 978-1-624-25051-4
 ISBN (PDF) 978-1-624-25052-1
 ISBN (ePub) 978-1-624-25053-8
 ISBN (mobi) 978-1-624-25055-2
In this publication, there are many links to other websites. These links to 
websites do not constitute an endorsement by the U.S. Department of State  
of the site or the opinions presented therein.
Photographs: Images on pages 82, 88, 126, 128, 131, 138, 139 © 2011 Amy Tarmey
All other images © Shutterstock.com

  | 7 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
Rationale
There are unlimited advantages to using the visual arts for developing English language learning 
skills. The arts can be a source of inspiration, imagination, and motivation for learners. They can 
engage students in a variety of themes, subjects, and issues, as well as introduce learners to new 
ways of seeing the world. Most importantly, the arts can provide students with a voice in a world 
where they have limited English proficiency. 
This activity book is intended for English language teachers who would like to reap the benefits 
that the visual arts provide, but are unsure of where or how to begin. By providing art ideas and 
guidelines, matched with language objectives, this book seeks to use the arts as a tool to build 
and strengthen English reading, writing, listening, and speaking skills and develop the confidence 
students need to take risks and explore within a new language. Designed to supplement regular 
coursework, the purpose of this book is not to provide art lessons, but rather to provide ideas of how 
to incorporate the arts into the language classroom to make English accessible and understandable 
to students. 
Organization
The art and language activities in this book are designed for primary and secondary school students. 
Each activity lists a language objective and suggested skill level. There are four media explored in 
this book: drawing, collage, sculpture, and mixed media. The activities are designed to be used in -
dependently rather than sequentially, giving the teacher the flexibility to choose an activity that best 
fits the desired topic, language focus, and available art materials of the language classroom. 
In addition to flexibility, an important design feature of this book is adaptability. While art materials, 
language objectives, and skill levels are listed for each activity, most activities can be adapted and 
modified in numerous ways. Look for modification suggestions at the beginning and end of each les-
son labeled as Art Options or Extension Activities, or at the Additional Resources to supplement and 
enhance the lesson plans. These features enable the teacher to use, adapt, and modify an activity in 
various ways to best suit the needs of the students. 
The below grid is a model of what will be found at the beginning of each lesson:
Objective: This is the language-learning objective for the lesson plan.
Level: This indicates the student level for the lesson.
Materials: This lists the materials needed for the art project.
Teacher Preparation: This is what the teacher will need to do to prepare for the lesson.
Art Options: This will list variations in case the materials listed above do not work in the 
teacher’s specific setting.

8 | 
Selecting an Activity
There are three ways to select an activity to fit the needs of the students. 
• Language Focus: The language focus of each activity is placed at the beginning of each activ-
ity. Most activities in this book are organized around an authentic communication goal and 
discrete language structures. These objectives are designed to be adapted and modified to 
best suit the needs of the students. 
• Topic: In each chapter, the activities are organized under topic headings. 
• Art Medium or Materials:  Each chapter of this activity book is organized by art medium. 
This enables the teacher to easily search for an activity depending on what materials are 
available. However, most activities also offer suggestions for art material variations. The Art 
Options listed at the beginning of each lesson offers valuable suggestions on alternate mate-
rials. Likewise, adaptation and modification are encouraged. 
Teaching the Lesson
There are no exact rules or steps for making art. The tips outlined below offer broad guidelines and 
suggestions to take into consideration when creating art with students. 
1. Choose an appropriat e activity for the students. 
 Before beginning an art activity, read through the activity instructions, extensions, and varia-
tions to make sure the activity is suitable or adaptable for the age and language ability levels 
of the students. Most activities can be adapted and modified in numerous ways to fit the 
needs of students. 
2. Collect the necessary materials, or alternate materials, needed to complete the activity. 
 Read the materials lis t and the instructions for each lesson before beginning the activity with 
students. If the resources listed in the beginning of the activity are not available, read the Art 
Options section at the beginning of the activity for ideas on other ways to complete the activity. 
3. Help students plan the basic design of the artwork: the composition. 
 Most art activities require some planning. The amount and type of planning will depend on 
the age of the students, the specific activity, and the amount of time desired to spend on the 
activity. With both two-dimensional and three-dimensional artwork, students have a limited 
amount of space to work with. The teacher can help students plan how they will use the space 
provided by asking them to think about the organization or arrangement of the subject(s), the 
size of the subjects(s), and the desired colors and color combinations to be used. In many 
cases, the teacher can also show students how to organize the design of a piece of artwork 
by doing an example with the class, or by demonstrating with a student example. 
 

  | 9 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
Art Tips
Tips specific to each art medium can be found at the beginning of each chapter . Listed below are a 
few tips and suggestions that are common to all art media and activities included in this book. 
• If pos sible, have students bring in old shirts or other old clothes that can be worn over their 
clothes to protect them from paint, glue, or any other messy art materials being used.
• If s tudents are working with messy materials, try to cover and protect the surfaces students 
will be working on (desks, tables, and floor) with old newspapers or scrap (recycled) papers. 
By covering students’ workspace, the furniture in the classroom will not only be protected but 
clean-up will also be faster and easier . 
• Old baking supplies such as muffin tins or met al baking sheets make good paint mixing trays 
or palettes. 
• Recy cled materials such as magazines, papers, cardboard, plastic containers, and glass jars 
are utilized in many art activities throughout this book. If possible, collect these items for use 
in the classroom or ask students and other teachers to collect such recycled materials to 
donate for art activities. 
• Each chapter includes a materials list. The lists provided are broad suggestions of common 
materials used in art activities. They are intended to give the teacher an idea of possible 
materials that can be used with the art medium. Not all of the materials listed are needed 
to complete an activity. Feel free to adapt, modify, or add additional materials to any activity to 
best suit the resources available and the needs of the students.
• Ther e is a glossary provided at the end of the book with definitions and images for art pro -
cesses and materials that may be unfamiliar . 

  | 43 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
A collage is a picture or design created by gluing different materi -
als, objects, shapes, or colors onto a surface. Collage is a great 
tactile alternative to drawing and painting. When paired with a lan-
guage focus, collage can generate enthusiasm and motivation for 
language use, engage students with English, and aid in the under -
standing of the target structure, vocabulary, or grammatical forms. 
Tips for Collage:
• Gathering mat erials 
 Collages c an be made from a wide range of materials, as 
the following lesson plans will show. Many recycled and 
free materials can be used to create collages. Look for and 
collect recycled paper, colored papers, magazines, card-
board, newspapers, postcards, old greeting cards, string, yarn, fabrics, and buttons to use 
in collage activities. 
• Bases and surf aces 
 Ev ery collage project needs a base to create the collage on. The base can be anything that 
other materials can be glued or taped to, such as a piece of paper, cardboard, or poster 
board. If students are creating a small collage, with little layering, a piece of regular paper 
would be fine to use as the base. However, if students are creating a large collage or a col-
lage with many different materials or many layers, the base should be something stronger 
and thicker, such as recycled cardboard, heavy paper, or poster board. 
• Building by lay ering
 Lay ering materials is a common technique used to create collages. Have students start 
with the large forms or shapes of the collage first and then layer the smaller details last. 
For example, if creating a collage of a person, begin with the large parts of the person’s 
body first, such as the torso, legs, arms and head. Then use smaller pieces of paper or 
other materials to make the small details, such as the hands, feet, eyes, ears, nose, and 
mouth. 
• Using glue
 Glue is a c ommon material used in collage. There are several types of glue that can be used 
in collage activities: white glue, paste, or glue sticks. When using glue or paste, students 
can pour glue from the bottle, or paint glue onto the surface. To paint glue onto paper, first 
pour a small amount of glue on a piece of paper or in little jar . Then, use an old paintbrush 
to dip into the glue and paint it onto the surface. 

44 | UNIT II: COLLAGE
Collage Materials
This is a list of all the materials that can be used to create collages. Each lesson plan in this chap-
ter will have a list of the specific materials needed to complete that particular project, with sug-
gestions for variations in case different resources are on hand. 
Required  
• Collage surfac
e: paper, cardboard, or 
 the classroom board or wall  
• Material(s) t
o create the collage  
• Glue or tape 
Optional
• Brushes for glue or paint
• Colored pencils 
• Crayons
• Fabric
  • 
Greeting cards
 
 • Magazines
 
 • Mark
ers
 
 • 
Materials from nature: grass, straw, 
 twigs, sand, small rocks, flowers,   
 leaves, seeds
 
 
  
  
• Ne
wspaper 
 
 • P
aper
 
 • P
encils
 
 • Phot
ographs
 
 • 
Recycled materials
 
 • Scis
sors
 
 • String or yarn

  | 45 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
COLLAGE ACTIVITIES
UNIT II
Title Language Focus Art Activity Page
Lesson 1:  
Neighborhoods
It’s Important to Me
Social issue poster and 
poster presentation using 
will for the future
Social issue collage poster 46
Lesson 2: Space
Reflecting Patterns
Diamante poem using  
contrasting nouns,  
adjectives, and present  
participles
Reflecting patterns collage 51
Lesson 3: Earth
The Earth around Me
Natural materials  
collage using similes and 
descriptive adjectives
Natural materials 
collage
56
Lesson 4: Jackets
Do Y ou Judge a Book by  
Its Cover?
Collage book cover and  
presentation using  
Wh- questions
Collage book 
jacket
60
Lesson 5: Shelters
Community Lessons
Map reading using  
prepositions of place
3D maps and building 
collages
66

46 | UNIT II: COLLAGE
LESSON 1
NEIGHBORHOODS
It’s Important to Me
Social issue poster and poster presentation using  
will for the future
Objective: Students will create a collage poster about a social issue and give a presentation 
using will to talk about the future. 
Level: Intermediate to Advanced 
Materials: Paper for the base, any collage materials available (recycled magazines, papers, 
etc.), pencils, scissors, glue, paste, or glue sticks.
Teacher Preparation: 1. Find local posters to use as examples in Part One. 2. Gather and 
collect collage materials for students to use. 3. Ask students and other teachers to donate 
materials such as old magazines, recycled paper, or scraps of fabric. 
Art Options: If collage materials are not available, this can also be completed as a drawing 
or painting activity. Students can draw or paint a social issue poster instead of using collage 
materials.
INSTRUCTIONS
Part One: Social Issue Poster 
1. Break students into pairs or small groups of three. 
2. Bring in exampl es of local posters to show students, or find poster examples online. Assign 
one poster to each group. 
3. Have students look at the poster and discuss as a group what the purpose of the poster is, 
what content the poster displays, and the design features of the poster . Does the poster ad-
vertise a product or event? Does the poster make a social or political statement? Is the poster 
used for decoration? 
4. Write the various categories of posters on the board, and have groups decide which category 
their poster should go under: advertisement, social or political statement, or decoration. 
Have groups tape their posters under the appropriate category. 
5. Discuss with the class the various categories and determine if groups put their poster in the 
correct category. 
6. Tell students they will be creating their own posters about an important issue facing their 
neighborhood, town, village, city, or school. Show students the Activity Example at the end of 
the lesson. 
7. Have groups brainstorm possible topics for the poster . Create a list on the board of the groups’ 
brainstormed responses. Each group should then pick a topic that is important or meaningful to 

  | 47 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
them. Possible topics might include education, pollution, transportation, or health care. Topics 
might be more specific, such as trash around the school, bullying, or graffiti on school walls. 
8. If possible, have students research their issue or problem online. Ask groups to investigate 
whom the problem affects; what people, groups, or organizations are doing to help solve the 
problem; and what they can do to help spread awareness or help solve the problem. While 
researching, have one student from each group be the “secretary” and take notes in their 
journals. 
9. After researching the problem or issue, have groups plan their poster with collage materials. 
Ask students questions to help them plan what to depict on their poster:
What type of picture, image, or design can you create that relates to your topic? 
How will the image grab the attention of people viewing the poster? 
Will you use words in your poster? If so, what do you want say? If not, how can you convey 
your message without words?
10. Groups should agree on a plan for their poster before they begin working. Tell students to 
lightly draw the layout or design of their poster first. 
11. Have students collect materials and make their collage posters. Invite students to bring in 
any materials from home or outside the classroom that might be useful for their collage 
poster . (Refer to the Optional Materials section in the beginning of this unit if needed.)
Part Two: Poster Presentations, Writing/Speaking Practice
1. When all groups hav e finished their poster, tell students they will educate the other students 
in the class about their social issue or problem by giving a presentation. 
2. Groups should work collaboratively on their presentation. The presentation should have three 
parts:
a. Introduce and discuss the problem. (Groups can refer to their notes from researching 
the problem earlier .) 
b. Show and discuss the poster the group created. (Groups should discuss what images 
and text they used to create their poster and why or how the images and text relate to 
the problem.) 
c. Discuss the solutions the group came up to help solve the problem. (Groups will need 
to discuss how they can help solve the problem and what they will pledge to do in the 
future. Review the use of will to express actions in the future with the class. The lan-
guage structure is outlined below.) 
3. Review the use of will to talk about things in the future. 
WILL for the FUTURE
Form: will + base of the infinitive
Use: To express future actions and predictions or assumptions
Examples: I will (I’ll) be a better student and study more.
 I will (I’ll) turn the lights off when I am not in a room to conserve energy.
 I will (I’ll) recycle plastic and paper more.

48 | UNIT II: COLLAGE
4. For example, if their poster is about littering, students might brainstorm solutions such as “I
will pick up trash I see around the school,” or “I will organize a school clean-up day with my
friends.”
5. To help groups brainstorm solutions to the problem they depicted, ask students the ques -
tions below, or write the questions on the board.
How does this problem affect you and your community?
What are some daily things people can do to help solve the problem?
What are some weekly or monthly things people can do to help solve the problem?
What will you do in the future to help solve this issue or problem?
6. Give students time to practice their presentations.
7. Have students give their presentation to the class. If possible, invite parents, teachers, or
administrators to come to the class for the groups’ presentations.
a. If your class is large, you can have a “poster session” instead of a poster presentation.
For a poster session, instruct half of the groups to display their posters around the
classroom. The other groups, as well as any invited guests, circulate around the room,
talking to the groups about their posters, the issues depicted, and the solutions the
groups came up with. After a sufficient amount of time, have the groups switch roles.
8. As a closing and assessment activity, have each student complete a survey about the social
issues and problems that were presented. A sample survey is included at the end of this
chapter . Adapt or modify this survey to fit the needs and level of your students.
9. With permission, display the groups’ posters in
the school or other community buildings to show-
case the work students did and also bring aware-
ness to the various problems or issues depicted.
Extension Activities: 
Community Project
After the presentations, have students vote on an issue 
they would like to investigate further . As a class, design 
and implement a community project to address the prob-
lem. Have students brainstorm different ways in which 
they can help solve the problem and design a project that 
addresses the social issue, builds community aware-
ness, and takes action to help solve the problem. For ex-
ample, if the social issue is pollution and recycling, the 
class could design a project to hold a recycling event, 
collecting recyclable materials from the community and 
bringing them to the proper place to be recycled. If the 
social issue is hunger, the class could have a food drive, 
which is when people organize to collect food for others 
in need. Students and teachers could collect canned goods from students, teachers, and community 
members and distribute them to poor or homeless people in their community. 
Activity Example
Image © Shutterstock.com; modifications © Amy Tarmey

  | 49 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
Letter to the Press — Community Project 
With more advanced students, have students write an article or letter to the local or school news -
paper about their community service project. The article can include a description of their planned 
project or activity, include a picture or copy of the poster they made for the event, or describe how 
the project and social issue have influenced the class. A follow-up report or article can also be sent 
after the project is completed, with photos taken during the event, and a description of the outcome 
of the project. 

50 | UNIT II: COLLAGE
SOCIAL ISSUE PRESENTATION SURVEY
Directions: Complete this survey before the end of class and hand it to your teacher .
Name:
1. Name one new fact about a social issue that you learned today.
2. Whose presentation inspired you the most? Why?
3. Which group’s poster design did you like the best? Why?
4. Of the social issues that were presented today, which one do you think is the most 
important? Why?
5. What did you learn that you can do to help solve the problem?

  | 51 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
LESSON 2
SPACE
Reflecting Patterns
Diamante poem using contrasting nouns,  
adjectives, and present participles
Objective: Students will write a Diamante poem using nouns, adjectives, and present parti-
ciples to illustrate two opposing views, themes, or subjects. 
Level: Intermediate to Advanced 
Materials: Paper of two contrasting colors, scissors, pencils, glue, paste, or glue sticks.
Teacher Preparation: If needed for younger learners, cut pieces of colored paper ahead of 
time for students to use to create their reflected patterns collages. 
INSTRUCTIONS
Part One: Opposites Warm-Up Activity 
1. This activity deals with opposite or contr asting ideas. Play an opposites game to warm stu -
dents up. Two opposite game options are listed below. 
a. Opposite Crossword Puzzle: Make a crossword puzzle online with the puzzle maker 
resource listed below. Create crossword prompts such as “The opposite of…” Example 
prompts are listed below. Students will have to write the answers for the crossword 
prompts in the crossword puzzle. Students can work on the puzzle individually or in 
pairs. 
Example Prompts:
The opposite of sunny The opposite of dry 
 The opposite of rich
The opposite of clean The opposite of fast  The opposite of happy
Discovery Education Crossword Puzzle Maker: http://puzzlemaker .discoveryeduca-
tion.com/Cris
sCrossSetupForm.asp
b. Opposite Flash Cards: Write words with clear opposites on flash cards. Make several 
sets so that students can work in groups. Give each group a set of flash cards. Time 
this activity. When you say “go,” tell students to turn over one flash card at a time. 
Groups then have to write down the opposite of what is written on each card. When you 
say “stop,” the group that wrote the most (correct) opposites wins. Flash card words 
might include strong, light, cold, big, short, skinny, noisy, clean, good, high, empty, and 
sad. 

52 | UNIT II: COLLAGE
Part Two: Reflected Patterns Collage
1. Show students the example at the beginning of the activity 
of a reflected patterns collage. 
2. Tell students they will be creating their own reflected pat -
terns collage.
3. Pass out materials. Each student will need one large sheet 
of paper for the base, and a smaller rectangle of contrast -
ing colored paper . The base sheet of paper should be twice 
the size of the smaller piece of paper .
4. Explain and demonstrate the s teps below:
a. Fold the bigger piece of paper in half, lengthwise. If needed, draw a light line down the 
fold with a pencil. After the paper is folded, unfold it. The crease that the fold creates 
should be used as a guideline or marker of the center of the paper .
b. Take the smaller piece of paper and fold it in half. Cut the rectangle in half along the 
fold, as in the pictures below. 
c. Draw shapes on the two pieces of colored paper . The shapes should touch, or come 
close to, one edge of the paper, as in the picture to 
the right. 
d. Cut the shapes out.
e. Line up the colored pieces of paper with the shapes 
cut out with the center fold of the larger base pa -
per . The two pieces of paper should be diagonal from 
one another, as shown on the right. Glue the colored 
rectangle to the base paper once the shapes are cut 
out. 
f. Arrange the cut-out shapes so that they lie opposite and reflect the spaces that they 
were cut out from. 
g. When the shapes are arranged corr ectly, glue the shapes to the paper . 
h. The finished product should be a reflected patt erns collage. 
 


  | 53 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
* NOTE: This activity can be made more detailed for older learners. To do so, students can 
use one large square of paper and cut out detailed and intricate designs from each side of the 
square. Students then reflect the cut-out shapes over each of the four sides of the square. 
Part Three: Reflected Patterns Collage Listening Activity
1. Onc e students are familiar with the format of the reflected patterns collage, repeat the activ -
ity again, but this time as a listening activity. 
2. Hav e students work with one or two partners. Have the pairs or small groups create another 
small reflected patterns collage and write the directions for making their collage. Students 
should emphasize the imperative form of the verbs used; for example: cut out a square or fold 
the paper in half. 
3. Students will then t ake turns giving their directions to the class. The rest of the class must 
follow the directions they hear to create another small reflected patterns collage. At the end, 
compare the collages students created with the group’s collage. To save time and allow every 
group to give their directions, students can use only one small sheet of paper instead of two. 
Another variation is that students could give their directions to one other group instead of the 
whole class. 
Part Four: Diamante Poem
1. Onc e students have completed their reflected patterns collages, have them write a Diamante 
poem. Diamante poems are diamond-shaped poems that involve two opposing ideas or top-
ics. Students can use either the two different colors represented in their collage as the two 
topics of the poem, or whatever two opposing ideas you instruct students to use. Examples of 
other topics might include night and day, summer and winter, city and countryside, or choco-
late and vanilla.
2. Students will have to come up with contrasting nouns, adjectives, and present participles for 
their Diamante poems. If needed, allow students to use dictionaries or thesauruses. 
3. Hav e students follow the Diamante pattern listed on the next page to create their poem. Write 
the pattern on the board for students to refer to. 
4. (Optional) Cr eate an example of a Diamante poem with the class to help the students see and 
understand the format of the poem. 
5. When s tudents are finished writing their poems, have students share their poems with the 
class. Make a list of the contrasting nouns used in the poems; explain any unclear meanings 
or relationships to students. 
6. (Optional) If s tudents write their Diamante poem about the two colors they used in their 
reflected patterns collage, display the collage, along with the Diamante poems, in the class-
room or school.

54 | UNIT II: COLLAGE
Diamante Poem Pattern
Line 1: One noun
Line 2: Two adjectives related to the first noun
Line 3: Three participles related to the first noun (-ing words)
Line 4: Four nouns, two related to the first noun and 
two related to the second noun (in Line 7)
Line 5: Three participles related to the second noun (-ing words)
Line 6: Two adjectives related to the second noun
Line 7: One noun — the opposite of the noun in Line 1
* Adapted from “Diamante” poem, p. 94, Writing Simple Poems, by Vicki L. Holmes and Margaret R. Moulton
Example Diamante Poem 
Black
Mysterious, Dim
Searching, Covering, Warning
Darkness, Shadows — Daylight, Warmth
Blinding, Shining, Dazzling
Pure, Light
White
Part Five: “I have… Who has…?” Closing Activity 
1. Reinforce the contrasting nouns used in the poem by playing the “I Have… Who Has…?” game. 
2. Write the contrasting nouns used in students’ poems on notecards, one per card. 
3. Give each student a card. Students must find the students in the classroom that have the 
contrasting noun to the noun on their card. 
4. In order to play this game, students must first identify what nouns are opposite of what is 
written on their card. Then, they must circulate around the room, telling and asking students, 
“I have… Who has/Do you have…?” For example, if a student has the word “summer” written 
on their card, he or she should say to other students, “I have summer . Who has/Do you have 
winter?” 

  | 55 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
5. F or large classes, this game can also be played with groups. Give each group a set of cards, 
with equal numbers of contrasting nouns. Each group member gets one card. Group mem -
bers must then work together to find the group member with the opposite noun on his or her 
card by asking, “I have… Who has…?” The first group to find all the matches wins. 
Extension Activity:
Abstract Diamante 
For more advanced students, have them write an additional Diamante poem about more abstract 
or philosophical subjects. For example, opposing topics for the poem could be love and hate, peace 
and war, or wealth and poverty. 

56 | UNIT II: COLLAGE
LESSON 3
EARTH
The Earth around Me
Natural materials collage using  
similes and descriptive adjectives
Objective: Students will create a collage from natural materials and write similes using 
descriptive adjectives. 
Level: High Beginner to Intermediate 
Materials: Paper, pencils, glue or paste, elements found in nature (materials will vary).
Teacher Preparation: Collect materials from nature and divide the materials into groups. Try 
to have the same items for each group. 
INSTRUCTIONS
Part One: Descriptive Adjectives Warm-Up Activity 
1. Coll ect materials from outside to bring into the class, such as rocks, grass, straw, leaves, 
pebbles, twigs, or branches. 
2. Divide the mat erials into four or five groups. Pass out a set of materials to each group. 
3. T ell students that each group needs to have one sheet of paper and a pencil. When you say 
“go,” each group has to write down as many adjectives as they can think of to describe natu-
ral materials. 
4. Giv e students about five minutes to look over the materials, feel the materials, and write their 
lists of descriptive adjectives. 
5. Aft er you say “stop,” have one person from each group show the class each material while 
describing it. 
6. The gr oup with the biggest list of accurate descriptive adjectives wins!
Part Two: Adjective Quiz Game
1. Compil e a class list of descriptive adjectives on the board. Each group should contribute to 
the list, and groups should add onto their group list any adjectives that they don’t have. Again, 
have students hold up the material the adjective describes. The list may include adjectives 
such as smooth, bumpy, rough, coarse, hard, soft, slippery, prickly, shiny, stretchy, and stiff.
2. Onc e the class list is compiled, have each group pick two or three adjectives they would like 
to explore further . Make sure each group has different adjectives. 
3. Students should writ e each adjective on a different sheet of paper .

  | 57 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
4. Tell students that to explore the word further they should use dictionaries and thesauruses to 
find the definition of the word, other meanings the word may have, collocations for the word, 
and synonyms for the word. 
5. Students should write what the y find on the piece of paper . Each group can also draw pictures 
to illustrate the adjective. For example, if a group is assigned the word bumpy, one student 
may draw a frog with bumps on its back, another student may draw a small picture of a 
bumpy piece of wood, or another student may draw a small picture of a bumpy road, with 
rocks and holes in it, all on the same sheet of paper . 
6. When every group is finished, tape the adjective papers to the wall, whiteboard, or chalk -
board where students can see them.
7. Have the groups present their adjectives to the whole class, giving the definitions and syn -
onyms, and explaining the pictures if needed. 
8. Students can also act out or find e xamples in the classroom that demonstrate the adjectives 
they were assigned. For example, for the adjective slippery, students could pretend the floor 
is very slippery or that they are holding a slippery snake that won’t stay in their hands. For 
bumpy, students could pretend they are riding in a car on a very bumpy road. 
9. Now play “Adjective Quiz Game” with students. Students can stay in their groups, each stu -
dent helping their group to come up with the correct answer . To play the game, you say the 
definition or synonym of one of the listed adjectives, and whichever group raises their hand 
first and answers correctly gets a point. 
10. Students should list en to the definition you say instead of trying to read the papers on the 
board. 
Part Three: Nature Materials Collage
1. Now that students are familiar with adjectives that describe materials found in nature, tell 
students they will be making a nature materials collage. 
2. Pass out a sheet of paper to every student. Instruct students to fold their paper two ways: 
first, fold the paper in half, widthwise, and then fold it in half the other way, lengthwise. 
3. Instruct students to look at the adjective papers hanging on the wall or board and choose four 
adjectives. Tell students to write the adjectives small, one in each box on their paper, in order 
to leave room for the collage materials. (For very young learners, you may have students only 
choose two adjectives.) 
4. Tell students the class will be taking a trip outside to find things from nature that demon -
strate the adjectives written on their papers. Ask students to remember their four adjectives 
so they don’t have to carry their papers with them, or have students write their adjectives on 
a small piece of paper that they can put in their pocket.
a. If it is not possibl e to take students outside of the classroom to search for things from 
nature, assign this part of the project for students to do at home. Ask them to find 
small items that demonstrate their adjectives at home or on their way to school. For 
example:
Rock — Rough 
Bark — Bumpy 
Flower — Soft 

58 | UNIT II: COLLAGE
5. Bef ore going outside, brainstorm with students for things they might look for . Help students 
come up with ideas such as rough bark, smooth rocks or pebbles, shiny blades of grass, 
coarse sand, or bumpy leaves.
6. If needed, giv e students bags, baskets, or plastic bags to collect their items in. Tell students 
to only collect one or two items that demonstrate each adjective. Students should be careful 
to not take too much so that the natural environment is not harmed. 
7. Go outside, as a gr oup, for students to look for and collect their items.
8. Onc e students have collected things and items that demonstrate each of their adjectives, 
have students glue those items in the boxes on the paper . 
Part Four: Simile Game
1. Onc e students have finished their nature texture collage, play a simile game. 
2. Demons trate to students what a simile is by writing a few similes on the board. Examples 
might include “She is as fast as a horse,” “The shirt is as black as night,” or “He is as quiet 
as a mouse.”
3. Re view with students the definition and structure of a simile. A simile is an expression that 
compares a thing or person to something else using the words like or as. Give students more 
examples of similes if needed. 
4. T o play the simile game, divide students into groups of three or four . 
5. Writ e the beginning of a simile on the board using the adjectives students have been working 
with in this activity, and the objects that students have collected for their nature collage.
6. Each time y ou write the first part of a simile on the board the groups have to think of a noun to 
finish the sentence that demonstrates the adjective used in the sentence. For example, one 
group may come up with “The flower is as soft as velvet,” while another group may say, “The 
flower is as soft as a baby’s skin.”
7. Hav e each group say their completed sentence. Ask the class if they agree with the group’s 
sentence. For example, if a group said, “The rock is as rough as a piece of glass,” the rest of 
the class should not agree that it is correct, because glass is usually smooth. 
8. Hav e each group think of and write the beginning of a simile on the board. The other groups 
then have to complete the simile.
Part Five: Closing Activity Options 
1. Re view the main components of this lesson, descriptive adjectives or similes, with students. 
There are several ways to do this:
a. Hold up different nature materials used in the group work at the beginning of the ac -
tivity. Each student has to say a descriptive adjective that describes a nature material 
before they can leave class. 
b. Say the beginning of a simil e and have each student or group finish the simile with a 
correct noun before they leave class. 
c. Hav e each student write an “exit ticket.” On a small piece of paper, have students 
write a descriptive adjective and its definition. They have to hand you their “exit ticket” 
before they can leave class. 

  | 59 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
Extension Activity:
Nature Objects Guessing Game
Break students into pairs. Have students select a nature item without telling their partner what it 
is. (This can also be done as homework: have students bring in nature items from home.) Without 
showing each other their item, the partners give each other hints or clues about their items using 
descriptive adjectives.
For example, students might say: 
It is smooth and red. I took it from a plant.
 (A flower petal) 
It is rough and hard. I found this object on the ground. (A rock)
In the end, have students show their nature item to each other to check their guesses. To play this 
as a game, have students keep track, or tally, their correct guesses to see who has the most correct 
guesses.
Activity Example


60 | UNIT II: COLLAGE
LESSON 4
JACKETS
Do You Judge a Book by Its Cover?
Collage book cover and presentation using Wh- questions
Objective: Students will create a collaged book cover, write a back cover paragraph for a 
book, and discuss their book in a book fair using Wh- questions. 
Level: Intermediate 
Materials: Recycled cardboard or poster board, any available collage materials (magazines, 
papers, postcards, etc.), pencils, scissors, and glue, paste, or glue sticks.
Teacher Preparation: 1. Collect materials, such as recycled magazines or papers, for  
students’ collage book covers. 2. Read the Art Variation section of this activity. If string or yarn 
is available, students can make a yarn collage book cover . 3. Find books to use as  
examples for Part One and Part Three. 
INSTRUCTIONS
Part One: Do You Judge a Book by Its Cover? 
1. Explain that jacket here means cover. Demonstrate what “judging a book by its cover” means 
by using other examples. 
2. Find f our or five books to show students. Show students the front covers only. 
3. Ask the clas s to vote on which book they would like to read. 
4. T ally the votes. Ask students why they think the chosen book won. Does this book have a more 
appealing design or image on the front cover?
5. Hav e students explain what judging a book by its cover means in their own words. 
Part Two: Collage Book Cover
1. As sign students a story or book to work from, or have students pick a story or book that they 
are familiar with. 
2. Onc e students have a book or story to work from, tell students they will be creating a new 
front and back cover for their book. 
3. Hav e students identify a character or scene from the story that they would like to illustrate. 
4. Cut the cardboard or poster board to the appropriate size for students’ book covers. (The cov -
ers should be larger than a normal book cover, in order for students to have more room to 
make their collage.)
5. If desir ed, students can draw the character, scene, or design on the poster board or card -
board with pencil first to create a basic outline of their collage. 

  | 61 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
6. Students should collect collage materials and begin cutting and gluing the materials t o cre-
ate their new book cover . 
7. If possible, students can add extra details to their collages with collage materials such as 
beads, buttons, or fabric. 
8. After the glue is dry, students should erase any pencil marks that are showing. 
Part Three: Back Cover Paragraph
1. Once students have completed their front cover collage, they will need to write a paragraph 
for the back cover of their book. 
2. Provide students several books to look at. Have students work in small groups or pairs to 
determine what general information is included on the back cover of books. 
3. Explain to students that the back cover of the book is not a 
large space, so authors and editors need to try to provide es-
sential information about the book, while also trying to grab 
the viewer’s attention, to make them want to read the book. 
4. Show students that you can often find quotes and opinions on 
the back book cover from people who have read the book. 
5. Select some books that your class has not read. Have stu -
dents share books if needed, and read the back cover of the 
books. Ask students to vote on which book they would select after reading the back cover of 
the book and have them explain why. 
6. Tell students they need to write a short description for the back of their collage book cover, 
as well as a reviewer’s quote about their opinion or reaction to the book. (Adapt this step to 
fit the needs and ability level of your students.) 
7. To help students organize the key information to include on the back cover paragraph for 
their book, have them use a Five W’s graphic organizer . Draw the graphic organizer below on 
the board for students to copy, or photocopy the graphic organizer included at the end of this 
lesson. 
WHO are the important  
characters in the book?
WHAT happens in the book? 
What is the book about?
WHY is this book special?
WHERE does the story take 
place?
WHEN does the story take 
place?
 8. After students have completed the graphic organizer, have students use the information in 
the graphic organizer to write the back cover paragraph. 

62 | UNIT II: COLLAGE
 *NOTE: Not all of the information included in the graphic organizer should be included in 
the back cover paragraph. The purpose of the Five W’s graphic organizer is to help students 
remember the important information from the book in order to select what to write about for 
their back cover paragraph. 
9. Next, have students write their reviewer’s quote for the book. If needed, review the use and 
purpose of quotation marks. 
10. Have students write or glue their paragraph and quote to the back cover . Students can also 
add collage images or designs to the back cover of the book. 
11. Have students bind the front and back covers together with three pieces of paper, yarn, or 
string. Cut each of the three pieces to the same size. Then, tape or glue one side of the paper, 
yarn, or string to the front book cover, at the top, middle, and bottom. Last, tape or glue the 
other side of the paper, yarn, or string to the back cover, at the top, middle, and bottom of the 
cover. 
Part Four: Book Fair 
1. Tell students the class is going to have a book fair or book party to present their book and new 
book covers to the rest of the class. (If possible, invite other classes, teachers, administrators 
or parents to attend the book fair .)
2. Divide students into two groups. One group of students should display their book and book 
covers on desks and tables around the classroom and stand next to them. 
3. The other group of s tudents should circulate around the room, asking questions to the stu -
dents standing next to their book. Tell students to ask the “five W” questions, questions about 
the students’ opinion of the book, and questions about the collage book cover design. 
4. After sufficient time, have the two groups switch roles.
Part Five: Book Fair Survey Closing Activity 
1. To check students’ participation in the book fair, while also reviewing students’ comprehen-
sion of the “five W’s,” have students complete a book fair survey. The survey can be found at 
the end of this chapter . Adapt or modify the survey to fit the needs and level of your students. 
Extension Activity:
“Inside, Outside” Book Review Circle 
Have students practice speaking and listening, and share information about their books, by do -
ing an “inside circle, outside circle” activity. To begin, divide students into two groups. One group 
should form a circle in the classroom, facing outwards. The other group should form a circle around 
the first circle, facing inwards. The students should be equally matched up, each facing another 
student in the other circle. If there are an odd number of students, one student can be the student 
helper and help manage time or call “switch.” Tell the inside circle of students that their job is to 
talk about their books. The job of the outside students is to ask the inside students questions about 
their books. Remind the outside students to ask Wh- questions and questions about the students’ 
personal opinions about the book. Say “go” to start the activity. After a minute or two, tell students 

  | 63 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
to switch (or have the student helper call “switch”). Tell the outside students to rotate one person to 
their right. Inside students stay where they are. Students are now matched up with a new partner to 
talk about their book with. Keep rotating students every few minutes. Then, change the directions. 
Have the outside students talk about their books, and the inside students ask questions. 
Art Variation:
If yarn or string is available, students can create a yarn collage book cover . Students should first 
draw the character, scene, or design for their book cover with pencil. Students should then cut 
pieces of yarn to fit the different parts of the drawing. Next, have students glue the yarn to their 
drawings in several ways:
a. Gentl y squeezing glue onto the pencil lines and placing the yarn on top of it. 
b. P ouring a little glue into a small container and using an old paintbrush to brush glue 
onto the yarn, and then placing the yarn over the pencil drawing. 
c. Using an old paintbrush t o brush the glue directly onto the pencil lines, and then plac-
ing the yarn on top of it. 

64 | UNIT II: COLLAGE
BOOK COVER GRAPHIC ORGANIZER
Directions: Read the back cover of your book. Then, with a partner, complete this worksheet.
WHO are the important  
characters in the book?
WHAT happens in the 
book? What is the book 
about?
WHY is this book  
special?
WHERE does the story 
take place?
WHEN does the story 
take place?

  | 65 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
BOOK FAIR SURVEY
Directions: After your art walk, complete this worksheet and hand it to your teacher .
BOOK FAIR SURVEY
Name:
1. Whose book c over did you like the best? Why?
2. What book w ould you like to read after hearing the book presentation in the book fair? 
Why?
a. Where does this story take place?
b. When does this story take place?
c. Who are the characters in the book?
3. Which back c over did you like best? Why?
4. What was y our favorite part of this book fair?
5. What was y our least favorite part of the book fair?

66 | UNIT II: COLLAGE
LESSON 5
SHEL TERS
Community Lessons
Map reading using prepositions of place
Objective: Students will use a community collage to give and follow directions using  
imperatives and prepositions of place. 
Level: Beginner to Intermediate 
Materials: Old magazines or images of community buildings, tape, glue, paper, pencils, 
crayons, or colored pencils. Optional: tempera paint, paintbrushes, or markers.
Teacher Preparation: 1. Collect magazine images of community buildings. 2. Find a large, flat 
surface to use for as a base. Cover the surface with paper . 3. Draw streets of the neighborhood 
on the paper, or have students draw the streets. Be sure to draw the streets so that students 
can place their building collages inside the map and along the streets. Also, make sure to give 
the streets names; students will use the street names to give directions later in the activity. 
Art Options: If the materials above are unavailable, students can make a collaborative 
drawing instead. To make a collaborative drawing you will need a large sheet of paper or 
several small sheets of paper taped together . Hang the paper on the board or classroom 
wall. Draw streets on the paper and have each student contribute by drawing a building 
in the community. Students can then use the collaborative drawing to practice giving and 
listening to directions. 
INSTRUCTIONS
Part One: Name that Place! Warm-Up Activity 
1. Br ainstorm with students what makes up a community and create a list on the board of the 
different types of buildings, public offices, and businesses that can be found in a neighbor-
hood or community. The list might include a school, grocery store or market, post office, 
hospital, police station, fire station, library, bank, town hall, gas station, stores, apartment 
buildings, houses, and office buildings.
2. Br eak students up into groups. 
3. Hav e one student from each group write each place from the list on a strip of paper and then 
fold the strips in half. 
4. Put all of the s trips of paper in the middle of the group. 
5. One gr oup member should then choose a strip of paper and describe that place or building 
to the group without saying its name. 
6. Whoe ver guesses the place correctly gets to choose a strip of paper next.

  | 67 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
7. “Guess that Sketch” is a variation for this activity. Have students draw — instead of describe 
— the places that they chose. The first group member to correctly guess the place gets to 
draw next. 
Part Two: Community Collage 
1. Tell students they will be creating a collaborative community collage. Each student will draw 
or construct a building to include in the collage. 
2. Have each student choose a different building to create from the neighborhood list. If your 
class is small, students may need to make two or three places from the neighborhood list. 
3. Help students find the right photos for their collages. 
4. After students complete the basic forms, have them add details such as doors, windows, and 
signs. These details can be added with crayons, markers, or paint and will help distinguish 
what types of buildings the sculptures are. 
5. When students’ collages are completed, have them place their buildings within the map 
along a street or on a street corner . (See the instructions for creating the map in the Teacher 
Preparation section of this activity.)
6. Help students organize the buildings so that they are spaced evenly within the map. 
7. Once every sculpture has been added to the map, have students draw or paint any extra de-
tails on the map. Extra details may include a park, trees or bushes, stop signs or traffic lights, 
or any other features of a neighborhood that students can think of. See the illustrations of 
neighborhood blocks below as examples of how the collaborative community might look. 
Part Three: Prepositions of Place and Imperative Statements with Directions 
1. When the community collage is complet e, review prepositions of place that are associated 
with giving directions. 
2. Write a list of prepositions on the board. Add or modify the list as needed to suit the ability 
level of your class.
across at behind beside between
near next to on opposite far
3. Use the community collage to demonstr ate prepositions of place by describing the location 
of one of the buildings. For example: “The grocery store is across from the post office.”
4. Have students work in their groups and choose five prepositions. For each preposition, stu -
dents should use the community sculpture to write statements and questions to ask another 
group. For example, “This building is located behind the post office and across from the mar-
ket. What is it?” 

68 | UNIT II: COLLAGE
5. Gr oups should then exchange their statements and questions with another group.
6. Gr oups then read the statements and questions and try to locate the correct building in the 
community sculpture.
7. Ne xt, review imperative commands that are used to give directions with a physical response 
activity. 
8. Hav e students stand up. Tell students you will say commands. Students must listen to what 
you say and then do it. For example, if you say “Turn left,” students should turn to their left. 
9. Use imper ative commands such as turn left, turn right, go straight, or stop. 
Part Four: Giving and Listening to Directions
1. T o practice listening to and giving directions, break students up into pairs.
2. Writ e the names of the buildings in the community sculpture on strips of paper . Make two 
sets or use the strips of paper used from Part One. 
3. T ell each pair to pick two strips of paper . Make sure they do not pick the same place twice. 
4. Students mus t then use the community sculpture to give directions from one place to an -
other . For example, if they picked grocery store and library, they might say: 
 T o get from the library to the grocery store turn left on _______ street and go two blocks. 
Then, turn right on __________ street, and the grocery store is on the corner of ________ 
and ___________ streets. 
5. Hav e the pairs of students continue to pick two different locations and give directions from 
one place to another place. 
6. Onc e all students have practiced, have them take turns presenting their community maps to 
the class.
Part Five: Exit Ticket 
1. Hav e students write three sentences on a small piece of paper using the prepositions learned 
in this lesson to turn in before they leave the class. 
Extension Activity: 
Community Pamphlet and Tour
Have each student design a pamphlet and tour for people visiting the imaginary neighborhood. A 
pamphlet is a piece of paper or small book that gives information about something. To create a 
pamphlet, fold a sheet of paper in half. Tell students to make up a name for the community and 
write it on the cover . On another side of the pamphlet students can create imaginary facts about the 
community, such as the population, the year the community was established, or what the weather 
is generally like. On the third side of the pamphlet students can draw pictures depicting various 
aspects of the community. Finally, on the last side of the pamphlet have students write directions 
for a walking tour around the community, including the various landmarks that will be seen on the 
tour (such as the market, post office, or school). The directions should match the locations in the 
community sculpture. If appropriate, have students exchange pamphlets and follow the directions 
of their partner’s tour to ensure the directions are accurate. The completed pamphlets can be dis-
played with the community sculpture. 

  | 69 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
Additional Resources: 
Visit the Housing and Urban Development Kids Next Door website to visit places virtually, get ideas 
for volunteering in your community, participate in online scavenger hunts, play interactive puzzles, 
and build virtual communities. 
http://www.hud.gov/kids/
Visit the EL Civics for ESL site to learn more about housing in the United States. 
http://www.elcivics.com/housing_lesson_1.html
Visit the Internet TESL Journal site for conversation questions about communities. 
http://iteslj.org/questions/home.html and http://iteslj.org/questions/community.html
 

  | 159 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
Acrostic (Word Poem) 
A type of poem usually made by spelling a 
word or name vertically and then using each 
letter of the word or name to write a phrase or 
adjective.
Example Acrostic Poem:
Curious sights, sounds, and smells.
Interesting and fascinating buildings and places.
Tons of new things to see.
Yes! Let’s take a trip to the city!
Background
The part of a picture that seems the farthest 
away from the person viewing the picture, or 
the ground or scenery located behind  
something.
Below, the island is in the background, or  
back of the picture, and the boats are in the  
foreground, or front of the picture. 
Cardstock
A type of thick, heavy paper . Cardstock is 
heavier and thicker than normal (computer) 
paper, and construction paper, but lighter 
than cardboard.
Cellophane
A type of transparent paper made from plastic. 
It can be clear or colored and is water- and 
oil-resistant. Cellophane is usually used to 
wrap candy, food, and gifts. The wrapper on 
this gift is cellophane.


160 | GLOSSARY
Clear Tape 
A type of adhesive used to bond paper  
together . It is not strong enough to bond  
heavier items together such as cardboard or 
fabric. Clear tape is usually transparent.
Colored Paper
Any kind of paper that is a color other than 
white. Colored paper can be used in creating 
a collage, for a background of a picture, or for 
the picture itself. 
Comic Strip
Groups of pictures that tell a story. Comic 
strips can also have words to help tell the 
story. The story is usually funny, or “comic”.
Composition
The plan, organization, or arrangement of the 
elements in a work of art. When artists think 
about the composition of their artwork, they 
think about the arrangement of the subjects 
in the artwork, the size of the subjects, the 
colors used, and so on.
Computer Paper
A type of lightweight paper most commonly 
used for everyday printing or for drawing with 
pencils, crayons, colored pencils or markers. 
Construction Paper
A type of paper thicker than computer paper, 
but not as stiff or thick as cardstock.  
Construction paper generally comes in a  
wide variety of colors and can be used in  
arts and crafts in many different ways.


  | 161 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
Crayon Resist 
An artwork that is created by using wax  
crayons and a water-based medium (usually 
paint) that will repel the crayon. The paint will 
not stick to the crayon, so the crayon remains 
visible through the paint.
Diorama
A three-dimensional picture or scene.  
A diorama can incorporate a wide variety  
of materials.
Fabrics
Types of cloth made by weaving, knitting, or 
crocheting natural or synthetic fibers together . 
Fabrics come in all types of textures, colors, 
and sizes. Common fabrics include canvas, 
cotton, felt, burlap, lace, nylon, and velvet. 
Foreground
The part of the picture that appears to be the 
closest to the person viewing the picture.
Below, the boats are in the foreground, or 
front of the picture, and the island is in the 
background, or back of the picture. 
Glue
A type of liquid adhesive used primarily to 
bond two thin objects together, such as pieces 
of paper . 
Glue Stick
A type of adhesive. A glue stick is glue in solid 
form. It can be used to bond two thin objects 
together, such as pieces of yarn or paper .


162 | GLOSSARY
Hot Glue 
A type of adhesive used to bond different ma-
terials together, such as fabric, cardboard, or 
plastic. Hot glue is turned into an adhesive by 
melting the glue with a hot glue gun. Hot glue 
should be used with caution as the melted 
glue can burn skin when it comes into contact 
with it. 
Hot Glue Gun
A machine that melts a solid adhesive (hot 
glue sticks).
Markers
A type of drawing tool made out of colored ink. 
Some markers have permanent ink, which can 
stain hands or clothes, while other types are 
made with washable ink so that students do 
not stain their hands or clothes.  
Masking Tape
A type of adhesive that is usually thin and  
easy to tear . It is stronger than clear tape. 
Masking tape can be used with paper,  
cardboard, or plastic. 
Matte
A type of texture that is dull, not shiny or 
glossy.  
Mind Map
A visual graphic that is used to brainstorm  
and organize ideas around a certain theme 
or subject. Pictures and words are generally 
written or drawn around the central idea or 
theme and then linked to other ideas.


  | 163 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
Mobile 
A sculpture made by assembling objects  
together and balancing or arranging them in  
a manner in which they can move freely.  
Non-Toxic
Indicates that the ingredients used in making  
a certain art supply are not poisonous to  
humans. 
Overlap
When one part of one object lies on top of 
another object, partly covering up part of the 
object. 
For example, the papers in this collage are 
overlapping one another . 
Paint Roller
A tool used to apply paint or ink evenly and 
consistently on a surface.  
Paper Fasteners
Metal objects that are used to fasten two or 
more pieces of paper through holes punched 
in the paper .  
Perspective
The technique of representing items in the 
foreground as larger than items in the  
background in order to create the illusion  
of depth, or receding space, on a two- 
dimensional surface.  


164 | GLOSSARY
Pipe Cleaners
Flexible, fabric-coated wires that can be  
twisted and bent to create a variety of different  
shapes. Pipe cleaners can also be joined  
together by twisting the wires together . 
Portrait
Any piece of art that captures the image of a 
person or people (usually the face). Portraits 
can be created with drawing, painting,  
photography, and even sculpture.
Poster Board
A type of paper that is generally larger and 
thicker than normal paper . It is similar to 
cardstock, but larger in size. It can be used to 
make large posters, projects, or signs. 
Primary Colors
The three basic colors that cannot be mixed 
or formed by any combination of other colors. 
The primary colors are red, blue, and yellow.  
From mixing these three primary colors all 
other colors can be created. Refer to  
Appendix A for an explanation of primary,  
secondary, and tertiary colors and color mixing.  
Recycled Materials
Any material that has previously been used 
and can be used again for an additional  
purpose. For art activities, recycled materials  
such as cardboard, magazine paper, glass 
jars, or metal baking sheets can be used.   
Secondary Colors
The colors made from mixing two primary  
colors together . The secondary colors are 
green, purple, and orange. Refer to Appendix A  
for an explanation of primary, secondary, and 
tertiary colors and color mixing.


  | 165 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
Shade 
A color made by adding and mixing black to 
any color . See Appendix A for a more detailed 
explanation. 
Silhouette
The outline of a person, animal, or object that 
is filled with a solid color such as black. 
Sketch
A quick drawing usually done to prepare or 
plan a more detailed artwork.   
Tempera Paint
A water-based paint that dries quickly with 
a matte finish. Tempera paints can usually 
be purchased in powdered or liquid form and 
are appropriate for students of all ages. Make 
sure the label on the paint specifies it is non-
toxic and safe for student use.  
Tertiary Colors
Colors that are created by mixing one primary 
color with one secondary color . For example, 
yellow mixed with orange creates yellow-
orange. Refer to Appendix A for an explanation 
of primary, secondary, and tertiary colors and 
color mixing.
   
Texture
How something feels to the touch. Rough, 
smooth, and bumpy are words that describe 
different textures.
Timeline
A line that is drawn to represent events in  
sequential order . Generally a timeline  
represents historical accounts. The events are 
indicated by dots or slashes on the line.


166 | GLOSSARY
Tint 
A color made by adding and mixing white  
with any color . See Appendix A for a detailed 
explanation. 
Tissue Paper
A type of very thin paper that you can see 
through. 
Watercolor Paint
A type of water-based paint, produced by  
mixing water with pigments. Watercolor paints 
are appropriate for students of all ages. They 
usually come in a tray, with squares of dry 
color pigments. Water can then be added to 
the dry pigment to paint.


  | 167 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
Adding Color 
If color materials are available, students can add color to their drawing with a variety of materials. 
Crayons, markers, colored pencils, or paint can be used to add color, detail, and richness to the 
drawings students create. Color can not only enhance the artwork students create, but also provide 
students with increased opportunities for descriptive adjective and vocabulary use related to color .
Tips for Adding Color/Painting:
• Make sure the materials are safe and appropriate for student use.
 If using marker s or paint, make sure the markers or paint are non-toxic and safe for student 
use. 
• Paints for students:
o Tempera Paint — Tempera paint is appropriate for students of all ages. It is a water-
based paint that dries quickly with a matte finish. Tempera paint can usually be pur -
chased in powdered or liquid form.
o Watercolor Paint — Watercolor paint is also appropriate for students of all ages. Wa-
tercolor is a water-based paint, produced by mixing water with pigments. Watercolor 
paints usually come in a tray, with squares of various color pigments. 
• Save time by “drawing” in color first.
 If you are using crayons, colored pencils, makers, or paint, you can save time by having your 
students draw or paint with such materials first, rather than drawing in pencil and then add-
ing color .
• Colors can mix when combined, layered, or touched. 
 When colors are combined, touched, or layered they will mix. For example, when crayons or 
colored pencils are layered on top of one another, the two colors will show a new color . When 
two colors of paint are mixed together, the two colors will create a new color . It is beneficial 
to know about color mixing because you may have limited colors available, but by showing 
students how to mix or layer colors or paints, students can create other colors to use in their 
artwork. Basic information on mixing and creating colors is listed below.

168 | APPENDIX
Primary Colors: RED, BLUE, YELLOW 
Primary colors are the three basic colors that cannot be mixed or formed by any com-
bination of other colors. From these three primary colors you can mix and create all 
other colors. 
Secondary Colors: ORANGE, PURPLE (Violet), GREEN 
Secondary colors are created by mixing the primary colors. 
• RED mixed with YELLOW creates ORANGE
• RED mixed with BLUE creates PURPLE
• BLUE mixed with YELLOW creates GREEN 
Tertiary Colors: YELLOW-ORANGE, YELLOW-GREEN, RED-ORANGE, RED-PURPLE, BLUE-GREEN, 
BLUE-PURPLE 
Tertiary colors are created by mixing a primary with a secondary color . The tertiary colors have two-
word names which indicate the primary and secondary colors used to create them. 
• YELLOW mixed with ORANGE creates YELLOW-ORANGE
• YELLOW mixed with GREEN creates YELLOW-GREEN
• RED mixed with ORANGE creates RED-ORANGE
• RED mixed with PURPLE creates RED-PURPLE
• BLUE mixed with GREEN creates BLUE-GREEN
• BLUE mixed with PURPLE creates BLUE-PURPLE 
Tints and Shades
A tint can be made by adding and mixing white with any 
color . A shade can be made by adding black to any color . 
Color Wheel
The color wheel shows the primary, secondary, and tertiary colors in relation 
to one another .


  | 169 
    
CREATE TO COMMUNICATE
Art Activities for the English as a Foreign Language Classroom
Printmaking 
Printmaking is the process of creating a picture, shape, mark, or design by applying color (print -
ing ink or paint) to a printing tool and then pressing the tool onto a flat surface. The picture, shape, 
mark, or design is transferred from the tool to the surface. Most prints can be produced repeatedly 
by reapplying color to the printing tool. 
o Printing “t ools” can vary. This activity book utilizes printing tools such as hard veg -
etables, like potatoes, or old sponges. 

170 | APPENDIX
Sculpting Dough 
Sculpting dough can be purchased at arts and crafts stores or made with the recipes below. 
Sculpting Dough Recipe #1
Ingredients: 
• 1 cup flour
• 1/2 cup salt
• 1/2 cup water
• (optional) Food col oring to give the dough color
Directions: 
1. Mix ingredients well until the y form a ball. 
2. Knead the dough and add food col oring if desired. 
3. If the dough is too sticky, add a bit of flour . If too dry, add a few drops of water .
Sculpting Dough Recipe #2
Ingredients: 
• 1 cup cold water 
• 1 cup salt 
• 2 teaspoons vegetable oil 
• Tempera paint or food coloring 
• 3 cups flour 
• 2 tablespoons cornstarch
Directions:
1. In a bowl, mix water, salt, oil, and enough tempera paint or food coloring to make a bright 
color . 
2. Gradually add flour and cornstarch until the mixture reaches the consistency of bread dough. 
3. Cover the dough to store it. 