Actalent Construction Manager Meet & Greet: Chibuzor "Chi" Ejimofor (Phoenix)
Tue, Jun 9, 2026

0:00 - Chibuzor Ejimofor
Now, now I do a lot. Western shirts are my, the main, main thing. Yeah.

0:06 - margwilson@actalentservices.com
Pants.

0:08 - Chibuzor Ejimofor
I try, try is a word. I try, I do try dresses, but women's clothing is truly a different world.

0:19 - Unidentified Speaker
Yeah.

0:20 - margwilson@actalentservices.com
Yeah. Very cool. Hi, Kristin.

0:25 - Kristin Filosa
Help someone on mute. Hello. Hi.

0:28 - margwilson@actalentservices.com
got Chi here for you. I will mute out. I got my camera to work finally. I know, I saw that.

0:36 - Kristin Filosa
I was like, hey, I'm just not looking at the bridge anymore.

0:38 - margwilson@actalentservices.com
That's right. I'll camera off. I'll let you guys get to it and then I'll jump back in at the end.

0:45 - Unidentified Speaker
Awesome.

0:46 - Kristin Filosa
All right.

0:47 - Unidentified Speaker
Hi, Chi.

0:48 - Kristin Filosa
Am I saying that right?

0:49 - Chibuzor Ejimofor
Yes, you got it perfect. Awesome. Beautiful.

0:52 - Kristin Filosa
Thank you, Margaret, for that. Yeah, I was going to say, whenever the initial time, it's always like chi.

1:00 - Chibuzor Ejimofor
Sometimes I get chai, I get chai a lot. And sometimes, sometimes people try the full name, which is not, it's actually phonetic.

1:08 - Unidentified Speaker
It's chibazor.

1:09 - Kristin Filosa
It is phonetic, but sometimes people see the full thing and they, their mind melts. So, yeah, I could see it. I'll be honest, I'd like, I don't think my name is that hard, and I never get called my exact name. So, I understand what you're saying. It's either Kristin, Kristin, Kristin, Crystal. At this point, I just respond to anything.

1:33 - Kristin Filosa
Well, it's nice to meet you. I wanted to just get started. Thank you for taking the time to meet with us today. I know everybody's busy, so thank you for setting aside this time and meeting with us. My name is Kristin Felosa. I the construction program manager for Lee Atwood under Lee Atwood for the SSDs fulfillment centers at Amazon. So the SSD fulfillment centers are the sub-same day fulfillment centers that get you your product in a day or less. So those fulfillment centers consist of the center itself, and then inside is a pharmacy, usually a grocery, and sometimes a hazmat room for like chemicals and aerosols that people want. You know, deodorants are basically a lot of the hazmat rooms, things that people want immediately. I've been with Amazon for a little over five years. I started answering the phones, then moved into the HR part of it at AWS actually, and then came back under the construction side on DNC.

2:39 - Unidentified Speaker
I've been working in SSDs for two and a half years.

2:43 - Kristin Filosa
So since I came back to construction, I had a kitchen and bath design company prior to this outside of Amazon. And so, since I came back to construction, I've been only with SSD. So, any SSD questions you've got, I am the person to ask. One of the longest-running people in SSD right now, so which is crazy, but absolutely. Now, why don't you tell me a little bit about yourself?

3:06 - Chibuzor Ejimofor
Yeah, uh, so my name is Chi, uh, I have uh my background or my original background is in I got a degree in chemical engineering but my experience has been mainly as an owners rep project manager for my last two roles. I'd say I really cut my teeth in at Seattle Genetics or CGen working that was like the yeah that was my biggest that was the most projects that I had been handling at one time whenever I got that role. Not a lot of structure whenever I started. So that was something, you know, I had to build my own checklist, build my own processes along the way. And then whenever management was hired above me, you know, export the things that I discovered alongside in that role. And then whenever that, whenever CGEM was acquired, I moved on in a similar role in the current company that I'm at, where I kept some of the responsibilities of the Site Miner Works small projects where we were installing things and doing construction projects for scientists. And then had additional responsibilities doing more, doing bigger projects, design, build, still owner's rep, but more full cycle. I mean, all of the project management that I've done has been full cycle project management. But let's say bigger budgets, bigger projects. I'd say I split my time right now between the site minor works projects, about 30 of those ranging probably like $50,000 to $100,000 in budget, and then to bigger projects where we work with Native American tribes across the country and on contracts that they get with the DOJ. So, if they come up with a project that they want to accomplish, that meets the requirements of a specific grant, then we work with them to develop that project. Full cycle project management. Of these tribes don't have a lot of experience in.

5:21 - Chibuzor Ejimofor
uh so we're we really uh do a lot we really hold their hand and and um to to create the the vision that they want um on on whatever they're building whether that's a a courthouse or um mother uh yeah or whatever it is yeah um so that's uh uh the the um yeah that's a that's a little bit of the overall um specific to the role here, I have done warehouse retro. I have done at least two warehouse projects, one back at my time at CGen, and then one currently, it was a couple years back at Pfizer, that both retrofits where they were moving, you know, they were increasing their capacity. You know, they're in. Their capacity after getting a couple of different drugs approved. And for both of those, I was I was responsible for, you know, handling the project end to end from the beginning, working with working with the design, you know, architect on the design, bidding the project out, getting permits, you know, getting a schedule together. And then ultimately, you know, sitting day to going on site day to day with contractors, making sure that work is being done according to the expectations and money is being spent according to the expectations that we set in the schedule up front. So I can go into any of the specifics on anything, you depending on, I'll let you take the lead from here.

7:04 - Kristin Filosa
No, that's fun. This, and just so you know, this is supposed to be a much more casual. It's not a sit-down interview. A much more casual just talk to for you to be able to ask any questions you have about the team. And it's more you get to question me more than the other way around.

7:21 - Unidentified Speaker
So, okay. There you go.

7:24 - Kristin Filosa
Put me in the hot seat. It's good. In terms of the projects that you have worked on. What was like the size monetarily of the projects? Are they like under a million, over 20 million?

7:39 - Chibuzor Ejimofor
Right. I think the biggest one that I've been like the, had the most responsibility on has been 25 million, 500,000 square foot retrofit. But typically, like for the, let's say for the, for the tribes, it's anywhere from like one to 10 million. Um would be like typical stuff that that I handle on it on like a day-to-day basis and then of course we have bigger i've i've had bigger projects come here and there and then a lot of uh let's say smaller projects that um yeah a lot of smaller projects um yeah so and for both for me I think one of the the thing to learn between them it's it's all about uh having your for me it's checklists your checklists and ready and developing them as different as time goes on. Because, you know, at the beginning, you nobody's going to, people will be angry depending on the executive or the stakeholder, but people can understand if it's your, you know, your first time working on a certain project and people can understand things happening, but it's unacceptable over time for the same mistakes to be. Happening, the same budget overages, and similar issues happening from project to project with a specific customer. There's some grace period, of course, with anything, but it's imperative to have those feedback loops, which is something that I took from the smaller projects where it's quicker turnarounds, smaller budgets, but it's something that I've taken into the bigger projects where. Yeah, it's the readiness checklist will save your butt, whenever the next warehouse comes along and for example, I'm not gonna mess up on rack height anymore. We had a project, it was one of the things that came up. An assumption, like the size of boxes that were going to be used. And project finished. And here, you know, we have, yeah, they're pushing the boxes in, and it's hitting the sprinkler system.

9:53 - Kristin Filosa
And then, so that's, you know, gotta get the rack height has to do with the A of the fire suppression system. Yeah, I believe that too. This is one of the things it's like for anybody who's done a project like that before, it's maybe it's obvious, but then, you know, for, you know, the, if the knowledge isn't passed around, you you're just not have it.

10:14 - Chibuzor Ejimofor
But it's up to you in the future to write that down, put the checklist. Hey, show me all the boxes that you plan on using. Show me the maximum, maximum, like, you know, God forbid, what are we going to use? So, yeah.

10:28 - Kristin Filosa
Well, that is a good thing about this team. We do share our lessons learned and we try to implement those across. All the sites, but you know, some do. So, like the racking in a pharmacy has to be a certain height, and combustible material can't be stored on that above five feet and all that. So, yeah, it's learning. And no matter some people may have that knowledge, but then others don't. So, we do try to share it as a great team in terms of sharing and communication, but absolutely. Well, what we build are some of them are. Like a retrofit. They'll be, you know, moving into 2027. There are some retrofit pharmacies going into existing SSDs, but for the most part, it would be building either from a shell or from the ground up, these SSDs. So the pharmacies are basically. Boxes that go within the fulfillment center. So it is its own building. You could take it out and put it to the side, and it has four walls, a ceiling, or everything. The groceries are the shelving and the standalone chillers. They're all on the outside. You can walk through the fulfillment center and see them. And then you would be building the walk-in chiller and the walk-in fridge as well. Well. And then the entire office block and the FC itself. So, as the FCs were always explained to me when I started, if you took the box was built and shook it, everything that sticks to the floor and stays in the box is what we build. And everything else is a different team, like startup launch, like real estate, we don't get involved with picking the sites. Once the site is picked, that's where we step in. Okay.

12:17 - Unidentified Speaker
Okay.

12:18 - Chibuzor Ejimofor
And then it might depend on the area, but what is the typical, I guess, is there a typical size of square footage or budget wise of projects that you foresee coming in the next one to two years? Or is it really, it ranges so much that there's nothing you can say about it?

12:40 - Kristin Filosa
SSDs usually run like 35 to 45 million. So that's usually the budget for them coming in. So based on the size, some of them are a little more, some of them 35, I think is pretty safe, but some of them could be a little bit more. It just depends on the size and the area that they're located and the cost to build. You know, we have one. Go ahead.

13:08 - Chibuzor Ejimofor
I was say, how much it sounds like you have some pieces of it that are pretty cut and paste, whereas other parts are very more variable. Like from a design standpoint, it sounds like there's like, yeah.

13:24 - Kristin Filosa
Yeah, they're not. You would think but they're not. They're all built and sized out to the building that they're in. When the site is picked, you would go to WWDE and you would work with your architect, and they would come up with a site shell and a plan for that space. And then it starts going from there. So, like, with what goes into it, where everything goes, and design and design like goes and puts the AR floor and the office block and all that stuff in. Okay.

14:01 - Unidentified Speaker
That makes sense.

14:03 - Chibuzor Ejimofor
And so, are you like the lead of the SSDE's program across the United States?

14:10 - Kristin Filosa
Lee and Terry are the lead of the SSD across the United States. So, we do SSD sites all throughout the United States. I roll up to Lee and intern Terry. Lee and Terry are partners, but I technically fall under Lee. So, yeah, so. I guess Lee's doing, I don't even know if they've broken it out that way. We SSDs are throughout the entire country. So, we are working throughout the entire country. So, what we would be asking of you is we would try to get you closer to a site or two or three where you could be on site like three to four days a week. So, you could be boots on the ground. Watch what's going on, know what's happening, see the pitfalls before they come, and being reporting those risks back and trying to mitigate them before they become issues.

15:03 - Chibuzor Ejimofor
Okay, perfect. And from my understanding, you did it, you had a couple of sites that were in the Phoenix area.

15:10 - Kristin Filosa
There are Phoenix sites, yes. Okay, that's perfect.

15:13 - Chibuzor Ejimofor
Yeah.

15:14 - Kristin Filosa
Initially, how far are you willing? To travel?

15:22 - Unidentified Speaker
Completely open.

15:22 - Kristin Filosa
We won't put you to go to a site in Boston. That's not what we're trying to do. Maybe Southern California, like things like that.

15:30 - Unidentified Speaker
Yeah. I would say my role right now, I travel a lot.

15:33 - Chibuzor Ejimofor
You we have even a project in the North Mariana Islands has been like the farthest, which is, I don't even know where that this. So, so I'm general. Yeah, I was where is that?

15:42 - Kristin Filosa
It's in the Pacific.

15:43 - Chibuzor Ejimofor
It's a set of islands in the Pacific Ocean. That it's a U.S. Territory, it's U.S. Territory. The U.S. Owns it's very strange. I don't they decide who gets statehood and whatever, but U.S. Owns. It's like Guam, North Mariana Islands, Puerto Rico. It's just owned, and like they just, whatever. I don't know. I don't know what the deal is. It's interesting, but so I'm definitely open to travel. It's easier, of course, like if for the Phoenix sites that are. Right here. Obviously, it's from my understanding where they're at. It's like, you know, 10, 20 minutes down the road. That makes it a lot easier to, I guess, onboard and learn. But in general, for travel, you know, I'm open to where there is the need.

16:31 - Kristin Filosa
Okay. Yeah. I know that the ask is like on paper like 70%. And I think that would be. Closer to launch, like when sites start getting to the point where they need, but I mean, you, that ask is coming for you that you be there and at least are available to be there during the week.

16:54 - Unidentified Speaker
We're not talking about going to Boston 70% of the time or something.

16:59 - Kristin Filosa
We're just saying that you're available to be on site during that time. There are three team off-sites a year.

17:07 - Chibuzor Ejimofor
So one was in, one just was in Seattle last week.

17:12 - Kristin Filosa
And the one before that was in Boston. There's one in December. So those are semi-mandatory. I mean, if there's a logical, like somebody on our team had a birth of a child and they didn't make it. So I there are things that absolutely people don't go for, but you know, if at all possible, they are like requested that you come to those.

17:35 - Unidentified Speaker
Yeah.

17:35 - Kristin Filosa
And it is nice because to meet the whole team and put like faces to names and personalities to names and talk. And so, and we do have weekly team meetings. So we do all that, but it is nice to see everybody in person and get to joke around and have fun and learn together.

17:55 - Chibuzor Ejimofor
Yeah. I love that stuff. There's a, I guess for, so you have like an overall team. Are there, I guess, for like a better, like pods of individual, like, for example, yeah, are there like mini pods where people kind of like there's three guys down here in the in the in the west, uh, in the southwest, and there's different like people and they roll up kind of like that, or is it more like literally everybody's kind of a big group and and uh everybody's a big group broken into smaller groups, but there's I don't know if there's rhyme or reason they're broken.

18:31 - Kristin Filosa
So basically, Lee and Terry are like the L7s that run SSD. Then under Lee are Angie and Kristin. So Angie is the West Coast. So she most of her CMs fall on the West Coast. There are outliers in all of these, but Kristin is East Coast, so most of her CMs, fall and PCMs, I should say, fall on the East Coast. And then Terry has Central right now. So most of her team is more in the centralized area. And then Lee kind of oversees all of them. And as well. So, I assume that Terry will probably have some managers under her coming. Terry came team about six months ago. So, she's still like figuring it out and we're trying to figure out how they both work together because SSG is growing so fast that we're just trying to get our hands around it, our arms around it. And then, like I said, I report to Lee. I am a construction program manager, but I do take on sites. In Florida, So so I have four sites in Florida and a site in South Carolina. So, and right now they're all in pre-con, so I'm doing the pre-con aspects of it, and they'll probably get end up getting handed off to someone like you in our area that you know can take it from the construction side on. But yeah, we all kind of reach out and help and try and take on stretch opportunities where we can.

20:03 - Chibuzor Ejimofor
Okay, for and so you mentioned, I guess, as far as like onboarding training, like let's say one to three months, what does, I guess, what does that first, what does the first bit of time look like for somebody that starts with the team?

20:25 - Kristin Filosa
You will get an onboarding program, which lasts, I think, four to six weeks. You'll probably go through it faster than that, to be honest. But and then you'll also get an onboarding buddy. So that will be a person that you can talk to about pre-con. Sometimes, depending on if the team has you doing more pre-con or more construction or both, you'll get one from each, or just, you know, somebody that's better knowledged than one or the other.

20:54 - Unidentified Speaker
So, yeah, then you work with them, and then usually within like a month or so, you're like kind of handed a site.

20:59 - Kristin Filosa
Amazon is very, I always say sink or swim.

21:03 - Chibuzor Ejimofor
Like, you just gotta keep paddling because it's gonna keep coming.

21:08 - Kristin Filosa
So, there's no, there's no slowing down. It's funny when people come on, they're like, you know, oh, I don't have meetings, and you know, I have free time, but I wish I had something to do, and I'm like, take it now because. Once you get into it and once it gets started, it doesn't slow down, it never slows down. So, and it almost like I was talking to Lee about it like two weeks ago because it was quiet, and we're like, Is this the calm before the storm? I'm like, it's almost concerning if it gets a little too quiet. So, what's about to happen exactly? But yeah, but the team is. Great. So I do love the team. So it is a wonderful team to work on.

21:55 - Chibuzor Ejimofor
Do you think, would you say you, I guess, and then this, to answer this question, obviously probably depends on the time of year and then the stage of each project. But how much, what would you say your work-life balance is in general? Is it, would you say like you're doing 60 hours, you know, and you're. Or it's like, yeah, and what do you find maybe in general across the team? Do you think people, um, is there a big range in how much time people have to spend on their projects, or is it really uh is there?

22:30 - Kristin Filosa
I think if you allocate your time well, you're gonna be like 45, 50 hours a week. I mean, and then some weeks you're gonna have less and some. Some weeks you're gonna have more. But I think if you're organized and allocate your time well, you can stick to that and have an excellent work-life balance. You know, we're we're lucky enough to be able to work virtually and like you're be close enough that if you have appointments and things, you can go and then kind of make it up later in the day or on a Saturday. So. We have that flexibility and it's really, really nice. And as long as you schedule with that and get your work done, there's not of questioning of, you know, why, what hit at noon are you like going to a doctor's appointment? That never happens as long as your stuff is getting done. So, yeah, it is, it's a great team, and you have a lot of flexibility, and you're given. A lot of trust right off the bat, which is nice. Awesome.

23:36 - Chibuzor Ejimofor
I like that. What tools, is there a common, is there common tooling, would you say? Or like, for example, Microsoft Project, Kahua, like Notion, what does everybody getting into?

23:50 - Kristin Filosa
Amazon uses Slack for communication. So that's like our texting platform.

23:54 - Unidentified Speaker
We like Slack everywhere. We also use our phones and text all day too.

23:59 - Kristin Filosa
So we for that. But then internally, we use something called BIM360 or ACC, and that's where all of our document storage is. We use Excel, SharePoint, all that for day-to-day communications.

24:16 - Kristin Filosa
Quicksuite is like our AI that we use.

24:23 - Unidentified Speaker
I'm thinking of I want to say Quip, but that's not it. We're getting out of Quip. We used to use QIIME, not using that. Zoom for these meetings.

24:31 - Kristin Filosa
And sometimes Microsoft Teams, some people use Microsoft Teams instead of Zoom. I just got used to using Zoom. OneNote. Oh, and then we have source and Coupa, which are our internal sources. The project management, you'll see all the information about your project on source. And then Coupa is where you're finding all your budgets and your cars and all your financing.

24:55 - Chibuzor Ejimofor
Okay. And these are like internally built and maintained.

24:58 - Kristin Filosa
They're internally built thing. Yeah. And I'd love to tell you that they work flawlessly all the time, but they don't.

25:07 - Chibuzor Ejimofor
Listen, I'm a software.

25:11 - Kristin Filosa
Yeah, I'm a software guy.

25:13 - Chibuzor Ejimofor
I like to try all new things immediately and, sometimes things crash, you know, but as part of trying all the new tech, you know, I'm very familiar with, you know, stuff not working or working and even making my own stuff to whatever extent. But well, that's good.

25:34 - Kristin Filosa
We love that. Love all that stuff. Yeah, it seems like sorry to interrupt.

25:42 - Chibuzor Ejimofor
Yeah, that's okay. I was gonna say, do you guys use a lot of the new thing now, of course, is artificial intelligence.

25:49 - Unidentified Speaker
A lot of people are using it as part of their workflow.

25:54 - Chibuzor Ejimofor
Do you guys, is there, is there some piece of the workflow where you guys are finding that you guys are trying to use some of the more, I guess, that cutting edge stuff?

26:04 - Kristin Filosa
We don't use, we use our internal. It's called like Quicksuite. We use our internal AI, but yes, and there's some other ones too, but like, but yes, internally, we are encouraged to use it, you know, especially for like program management and project management. And yes, we are encouraged to use it. It's not, not everyone is picking up and using it, but yes, we are encouraged to use it. It. And it is nice. I mean, I'm like right there saying that sometimes, you know, I hesitate to use new things, but my gosh, once you get started using it, it is like it cuts time. You know, I like white, write weekly white papers for initiatives, and there's like an AI done for that. And you like literally put in two documents, saying, Write me a white paper, and it's done in 10 minutes. So, yes. Once I start using it, I love But yeah, you are encouraged to use it.

26:56 - Chibuzor Ejimofor
Okay. So it's just for you personally, or for people, it's like people do use it, but it's very specific tasks you get like you get comfortable with it. You can use it for anything.

27:06 - Kristin Filosa
If you can come up with it and you can build it and help the team, absolutely. You can use it for anything. It just has to be the Amazon and internal stuff. Like you can't use ChatGPT.

27:16 - Chibuzor Ejimofor
and put Amazon information in there.

27:18 - Kristin Filosa
you know, but yes, like anything Amazon internal that, you know, you can use it. Yeah. And you're encouraged to use it. Okay. That makes sense.

27:30 - Chibuzor Ejimofor
For do you guys, for internal, I guess, criteria for like, I guess, project readiness, do you guys have a set standard for? When a project is ready for construction or ready to go, I guess, into pre-construction. Do you guys have those stage gates or kind of internal criteria like kind of set already, or is it still an evolving thing?

28:01 - Kristin Filosa
Okay. It's always evolving and like it could, it could shift, but you get it as a pre-con manager, like to start if you were to get a project from day one. You get it when sites selected. So, you like, we have weekly meetings on it. You know, one of our leaders, Angie, will call out, you know, hey, these sites are in pre-site selection, probably going to get done in the next week or so. These sites got sites selected this week. If you're like, if your list is in either one of those, usually, like, if mine are in the pre-site selection, I will reach out to the AOR and say, look, they're in pre-site selection. When can we get out there? Because you want to get the AOR out there in about two weeks to. Get out and like look at the site, see anything, especially if it's an existing site and not, you know, just one that we're building. But so, yeah, like you just that they will get called out weekly. And then, so that's the gauge for pre-con once you get that, once site selected, it becomes yours. And then, yes, there are gauges to get it to construction too. And right now, if you're in pre-con, you would. Would end up doing a construction that could change. So we could, it's nothing is the only thing that's consistent at Amazon is that things change consistently. So, you know, we've been, we were one of the pilot teams to do pre-construction and construction managers on one team. And then we were also a pilot to do it from a pre-con manager, taking it all the way through to construction. So right now, that's how we're doing it. If that pilot works, then we'll keep it that way. If it doesn't work, we might go back to having pre-con and construction and just pre-con managers do pre-con and construction managers hand it like they hand it off to construction managers and it goes from there.

29:42 - Chibuzor Ejimofor
Yeah, okay. Okay. How big is the team at the moment?

29:49 - Kristin Filosa
Right now it is 35 to 37 people. Okay.

29:57 - Kristin Filosa
And I know it's because we just did the

30:00 - Unidentified Speaker
Remind me of you. Just did the offset.

30:02 - Kristin Filosa
Were you there when the program started? I wasn't there when it started. I probably came about a year in. So, yeah, much, much smaller. I think our team was 15 people when I came in. And it has grown significantly since then.

30:28 - Kristin Filosa
What do you think the for?

30:30 - Chibuzor Ejimofor
So, you've seen a lot of people, you know. I come in. I mean, yeah, the team's grown by two times. What what, what do you think the people struggle with the most? Is if, you know, coming in, you from whatever background they're coming in from, is there anything, yeah, what do you, you know, yeah, Amazon does things differently than other companies.

30:54 - Kristin Filosa
So, what a pre-construction manager does at one company. Amazon probably does it and then does five things differently from there. So just knowing what you're supposed to do, when you're supposed to do it, the training is there, but there is so much training. And there's, you know, each site is a snowflake. Each site's different. And you want to say, oh, yes, if you'd like, for the most part, 70% of it is the same, but then there's that 30% that's not. So it's keeping up. And as long as you ask questions and reached out, we have a very helpful team. So if you use your onboarding buddy and you like find out who your connections are and who your team leads are and you learn that, you won't struggle. But if you sit and don't ask questions and don't know where to find something and it just builds and builds and builds, that's where the struggle comes from Okay.

31:50 - Chibuzor Ejimofor
Yeah, that makes sense. Yeah. Construction is the

31:54 - Unidentified Speaker
you know, construction resists the automation.

31:56 - Kristin Filosa
You know, it's, it's, which is good. Yeah, it's good.

32:01 - Chibuzor Ejimofor
It, you know, it's, um, it forces, yeah, you have to have a, you know, you have to develop an, you have to develop an intuition for, you know, when things are looked to be on target or when somebody.

32:17 - Chibuzor Ejimofor
you know i've dealt with a lot of different vendors some you know you can now I have a you can get catch a sense of when somebody might be uh you know when you might need to micromanage them let's say you know or watch them a little bit closer versus versus somebody else there's not a lot of micromanaging here so yeah like so you're you're expected to be able to to do it come in running hit the ground running And I'm, I mean, for the like, if you have a vendor, for example, that's not as communicative. That's me. I do vendor management.

32:49 - Kristin Filosa
You're saying if you have a vendor that's not communicative, you come to me. Okay. Okay, excellent. Sorry to interrupt, guys.

32:55 - Chibuzor Ejimofor
But I know I do have to go.

32:57 - Kristin Filosa
We're a little over time. So I don't want to keep you both.

33:00 - margwilson@actalentservices.com
I know you're both busy. Kristin, we can catch up via Slack, I think, to follow. And she will be in touch later today or tomorrow.

33:12 - margwilson@actalentservices.com
Thank you. It was nice meeting you.

33:14 - Kristin Filosa
Yes, it was nice meeting you. Yeah. Have a great day. Bye.